PEOPLE'S COMMISSARIAT OF JUSTICE OF THE U.S.S.R.

REPORT OF COURT PROCEEDLJ'iGS

nm CASE OF THE

~TROTSKYITE- ZINOVIE VITE

TERRORIST CENTRE
Heard Before tb.e
MILITARY COLLEGiUM OF THE

SUPREME COURT OF THE U.S.S.R.
Moscow, August 19-24, 1936

ln re
G. E. Zinoviev, L. B. Kamenev, G. E. Evdokimov,
l. N. Smirnov, I. P. Bakayev, V. A. Ter-Vaganyan,
S. V. Mrachkovsky,E. A. Dreitzer,E. S. Holtzman,
l. !. Reingold, R. V. Pickel, V. P. Olberg, K. B.
Berpwn-Yurin, Fritz David (l. l. Kruglyansky),
M. Lurye and N. Lurye
Charged under Articles f>88, 19 and 588 , f>S"
of L'le Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.

Published by the
PEOPLE'S COMMISSARIAT OF JUSTICE OF THE U.S.S.R.
MOSCOW 193S

CONTENTS
Page
AUGUST 19 (MOR'.'lil~G SESSION)

Indictment

9

Ezamiflation of the .4.ccused Mrachkousky

40

Ezamination of the ..\cc1ued Eudokimou

46

.-tUGUST 19 (EVENING SESSION)

Examination of the Accused Dreitzer

51

Ezamination of the .4.ccused Rei11gold

54

Ezamination of the Accused Bakayeu

59

Ezamination of the Accused Pickel

62

AUGUST 20 (MORNING SESSION)

Ezamination of the Accused Kamenev

61)

Ezamination of the Witness Yakoulev

70

Examination of the A.ccused Zinouieu

71

Examination of the Witness Safunoua

76

AUGUST 20 (EVENING SESSION)

Ezamination of _the Accused I. 'N. Smirnou

79

E:ramination of the Accused Olberg .

. .

86

E:ramination of the Accused Berman-Yuri11

92

AUGUST 21 (MORNING SESSION)

Examination of the ·Accused Holtzman .

98

Ezamination of the Accused N. Lurye .

101

Examination of thl Accused M. Lurye.

165

.

Examination of the Accused Ter-Vaganyan
f>

108

CONTENTS
Pag~

AUGUST 21 (EVENING SESSION)
Examination of the Auuse<! Fritz Dat•icJ (Kruglyanskg) .

112

Statement bg Comrade Vyshinsky, State .4.ttorney of the
U.S.S.R.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

113

Speech for the Prosecution by Comrade .4. Y. Vyshinsku,
State AUomeg of the U.S.S.R.. . . . . . . . .

117

AUGUST 22 (MORNING SESSION)

AUGUST 22 (EVENING SESSION}
Last Pleas of .Vracl:kovsky,Evdokimov,Dreitrer,Reingold,
Bakagev and Pickel . . . . . . . . . . . .

165

AUGUST 23 (MORNING SESSION)
Last Pleas of Kamenev,Zinoviev,Smirnov,Olberg,BermanYurin, Holtzman, N. Lurge and M. Lurye. . • . .

169

AUGUST 23 {EVENING SESSION)

."Last Pleas oj Ter-Vaganyom and Fritz David
The Verdict . . . . . . . . . . ,

6

173

174

REPORT OF COURT PROCEEDINGS

AUGUST 19 (MORNING SESSION)
The Com·t Session of the ?tlilitary Collegium of the Suprem.-.
Court of the U.S.S.R. opens on August 19, 1936 at 12:10 p.m. in thl""
October Hall of the House of Trade Union'>. The Court is presided
over by Army ~liliL'lry Jurist V. V. Clrich. '.\femhcrs of the Court:
Army Corps ~lilitary .Jurist I. 0. Matulevich and Divisional Military
Jurist I. I. Nikitchenko; reserve member of the Court: Divisional
Yilitm·y Jurist I. T. Golyakov; and secretary: Military Jurist of
First Rank A. F. Koslyushko. "
The prosecution is conducted by Comrade A. Y. Vyshinsky,
State Attorney of the U.S.S.R.
The President, Comrade Ulrich, declares the session of the
Court open, establishes the identity of the accused, and inquires of
them whether they take exception to the composition of the Court
or of the Slate Prosecution. After receiving the reply that there is
no such objection, the President announces that all the accused
having declined the services of counsel for defence, all rights of fhedefence are extended to them personally, i.e., the right to put questions to the witnesses and to the other accused, to petition the·
Court in all matters of procedure, to deliver speeches in their
own defence, etc. In addition to this, they retain the right of lasl
pleas.
The Secretary of the Court reads the indictment.
INDICTMENT
in the case of G. E. Zinoviev, L. B. Kamenev, G. E. Evdokimov,
I. N. Smirnov, I. P. Bakayev, V. A. Ter-Vaganyan, S. V. Mrachkov-·
sky, E. A. Drritzcr, E. S. Holtzman, l. I. Reingold, R. V. Pickel,
V. P. Olberg, K. B. Berman-Yurin, Fritz Dai•id (l.-1. Kruglyansky),..
M. [,urye and N. L;_,rye, accused of crimes covered by Articles 588 ,.
19 and 588 , 5811 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
9

On Jan. 15-16, 1935, the .Militzry Collegium of the Supreme
Court of the U.S.S.R. at a special se~sion in the city of Leningrad
iried the case of the underground countci::re_voiutionary group of
Zinovievites calling itself the "~loscow ct•nlr-~," the principal leaders of which among the others convicted in that case were G. E.
Zinoviev, L. B. Kamenev, G. E. Evdokimov and /. P. Bakagev.
The preliminary and the Court investigation of tl1at case established that for a number of years this so-called "Moscow centre"
guided the counter-revolutionary activities of dh·erse underground
groups of Zinovievites, including the coun~er-revolutionary activities of the Leningrad group of Nikolayev~Kotolynov which on
Dec. 1, 1934, foully murdered Comrade S. M. Kirov.
The trial established that the so-called "Moscow centre," being
the ideological and political leader of the Leningrad group of
:Z-inovie'l"ites, knew that this group was inclined towards terrorism
~md di.'1 all it could to fan this ·inclination.
This had to be admitted also by the accused Zinoviev and Ka.menev, who denied that they took any part in the murder of Comrade S. M. Kfror>, hypocritically stating at the trial that they bore
-0ruy moral am~ poliiical responsibility for the assassination of
Comrade Kirov.
It now transpires that eighteen months ago, during the investigation of the case of the assassination of Comrade S. JJf. Kirov,
the investigating and judicial auiliorities were not in possession of
all the facts reveaUng fue true role of t.l1e Zinovievite leaders of the
-so-called "Moscow centre" on >the one hand and the ieaders of the
Trotskyite underground organization <m the other, in the white.guard,. terroristic underground activities.
On the strength of newly revealed circumstances ascertained by
the investigating authorities in 1936 in connection with the dis-covery of a number of terrorist groups of Trotskyites and Zinovievites, the investigation has established that Zin<>Pieu, Ji.amrnev,
Evdokimov and Bakayev, who were cmwicted ~n the "Moscow
-centre" case, actuaUy not only knew that their adherents in Leningrad were inclined towards terrorism, but were the direct organizers of the assassination of Comrade S. M. Kirov.
The investigation aiSo established that Zinoviev, Kameneu, Ev4okimov, Bakayev, and a number of other accused in the present
10

case, who will be mentioned later, were the initiators and organizers of attempts whic11 were being prepared on the lives of
other leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and of
the Soviet Government as well.
The investigation has also established that the Zinovievites
pursued their criminal terroristic practices in a direct bloc with
the Trotskyites and with L. Trotsky, who is abroad.
These newly revealed circumstances establish without a doubt
that:
1) Al the end of 1932 the Trotskyite and Zinovievite groups
united and formed a united centre consisting of Zinoviev, Kamenev,
&dokimov, Bakayev (from the Zinovievites) and I. N. Smirnov,
Ter-Vaganyan and Mrachkovsky (from the Trotskyites), all
charged in the present -case.
2) The principal condition for the union of these counter·
revolutionary groups was their common recognition of individual
terrorism against the leaders ·of the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet
Government.
·3) Precisely from that time onwards \end of 1932) the Trotskyites anfi Zinovievites, acting on direct instructions from L; Trotsky, received by the united centre through special agents, concentrated their hostile activities aigamst the C.P.S.U. and the
Soviet Government mainly on the · organization of terrorism
a,,a.ainst the mos~ prominent -leaders of the Party and the Government.
'4) ·with this end in view the united. centre organized special
terrorist groU1ps, which ·Prepared a number of practical measures
for the assassination of Comrades Stalin, Voroshilov, Kaganovich,
Kirov, Orjonikidze, Zhdanov, Kossior, Postyshev and others.
· 5) · One of ~ terrorist groups, coosisting of Nikolauev,
Riitnyantsev, Mandelstamm, Levin, Kotolynot> and others, who
were co~victea by the Military Colliegium of the Supreme Court
of the U.S.S.R. on Dec. 28-29, 1934, carried out the foul murder
of Coonrade S. M. Kirov on Dec. 1, 1934, on the direct instructions
from Zinoviev ·and L. Trotsky, and under the direct guidance of
the united cenh'e.

11

I. The Trotskyilc-Zinovievite Gnited Terrorist Centre
The testimonies of Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdo/;imov, .Urachlcor>sky, Bakayev and a number of olhc-r accused in the present case,
have established beyond doubt that the only motive for organizing
the Trotskyite-Ziuovievile '110.: was their striving lo seize power at
all costs, and that the sole and deci~ivc means chosc-n for this pur~
pose was the organizalion of terroristic acts against the most prominent leaders of the Party and the Government.
Lacking all support in the working class and the loiling masses of the people of the U.S.S.R., ha.ving lost all their ideological
possessions, having no political progrnm and imbuc-d with bitter
hatred toward the Socialist victorit'S of our country, the leaders of
the Trotskyite-Zinovievitc countcr-rc\·olutionury bloc, Trotsky,
Zinoviev and Kamencv, sank definitively into th~ swamp of whiteguardism, joined forces and merged with the most inveterate enemies of the Soviet Power, and became the organizing force of
the last remnants of the exploiting classes which had Leen routed in
the U.S.S.R. In their desperation and hatred they resorted to the
most despicable means of fighting the Soviet Government and the
leaders of the C.P.S.U., namely, political assassinations.
At first, in the face of the first succes-.es of Socialism in the
U.S.S.R., they held to their hopes that difficulties would arise, wilh
which, in their calculations, the Soviet Power would not be able
to cope. But later, seeing that these difficulties were being sucl'essfully overcome and that our country was emerging victoriofls
from these difficulties, they frankly banked on the co111plication of
internatio~al relations, on war and the defeat of the Soviet Power.
Seei,ng no favourable prospects for themselves, they resorted
to the gun; they organiz~ underground terroPistic groups and
made use of the tnost detestable method of fighting, namely
terrorism.
At present the TrofJskyite-ZinovieV'ite conspirators, as a reason
for their fi..g:ht against the C.P.S.U. a'llld the Soviet Government, no
longer advance the claim that the Party and the Soviet Government are pursuing an allegedly wrong policy, or that the C.P.S.U.
and the Soviet Government are leading the country to its doom, as
they lyingly and slanderously asserted· in the past. As their prin12

cipal motive for resorting to lleri-orism they now advance the
successes of the building of Socialism in the U.S.S R., the successes
in the cultural and economic growth of the c.-ountry, which successes, demonstrating the ideological and political bankruptcy of
the Trot.skyites-Zinovievites, fan their hatred of the Soviet Government still more and intensify their desire to avenge themselves
on the Soviet Government for their political failure by resorting to
terrorism.
In spite of otidurate denials, the accused Zinoviev was compelled by the weight of evidence which was laid before him by the
investigating authorities to admit that:
" ... The main object which the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
centre pursued, was the assassination of tl1e leaders of the
C.P.S.U .• and in the first place the as'lassinalion of Stc11in and
Kirov."
(Vol. XII, p. 16.)
Another member of this centre, the accused Reingold, during
examination on July 3, 1936, testified:
" ... The main thing on which all the members or the
bloc agreed was ... the recognition of the necessity of consolidating all forces to capture the Party leadership. I must
admit that the fundamental aim of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
bloc was to remove by violence the leadership of the C.P.S.U.
and the Soviet Government, and Stalin in the first place. At
the end or 1932 the centre adopted a decision to organize
the fight against the leadership of the C.P.S.U. and the Gov·
emment by terroristic means. I know that the Trotskyite
section of the bloc received instructions Crom L. D. Trotsk!J
to adopt tbf path of terrorism and to prepare attempts on
the life of Stalin:·
~Vol. XXVU, p. 52.)
Exh~ustive evidence on the same point was also given during
the examination on July 23, 1936 by the accused Kamenev. The
accused Kamenev stated:

" ... The emergence from the difficulties, the victory of ~
policy of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. cauSed in us
a riew wave of animosity and hatred towards the leadenhip •
of the Party, and pr.imarily towards Stalin."
!3

" ... We, i.e., the Zinovievite centre of the counter-revolu·
t~onary organization, the members of which I have enumer-

ated above, and the Trotskyite counter-revolutionary organization in the persons of Smfrnov, Mrachkousky and TerVaganyan, negotiated in 1932 to unite both the Zinovlevite
and Trotskyite counter-revolutionary organizations for joint
preparation of terroristic acts against the leaders of the Central
Committee and in the first place against Stalin and Kirov."
". . . The main thing is that in 1932 both Zinouiev and we,
namely, myself (Kameneu), Evdokimov,:Bakayev and the
Trotskyite leaders, Smirnov, Mracblwvsky and 1'er-Vaganyail, decided that the only means by which we could hope to
come to power was to organize terroristic acts against the
i!eaders of the C.P.S.U., and primruily agairi.st Stalin. It was
precisely on t..1-iis basis of a terroristic struggle ·against fae
ieaders of the C.P.S.U. that negotiations for the union were
co11ducteil between ourselves and the Trotskyites:'
(Vol. XV, pp. 10, 12, 13.)
The accused Kamenev further stated that:
· " . . . However, our banking on .the insuperahility of the
difficulties which the eountry was experiencing, on the state
of crisis of lits economy, on lhe collapse of the ecunomic
policy of the Pa.rty leadership had obviously failed by the
second half of 1932.
"Overcoming the difficulties, the country, under the leadership of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U., was' sue·
cessfully advancing along the road of economic growth. We
co~ld not help seeing t.h.is.
$
"One wouid have thought that we should have stopped
fighting. But the logic of the counter-revolutionary struggle,
the nakedly unprincipled striving to seize power led us in the
other direction. The emergence from the difficulties, the vie·
tory of the poticy of the Central Commitlee of the C.P.S.U.,
caused in us a new wav:e of animosity and hatl'ed towards the
leaders of !he Party, and primarily towards Stalin."
(Vol. XV, p. 27.)
14

This was confirmed also by the accused Evdokimov who, on
Aug. 10 this year, gave detailed evidence on the organization of
the united centre and the terroristic po~ition adopted by it. In
reply to the question put to him by b.'le investigating authorities OB
what basis the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc arose, the accused EvdokiDiov stated:

" ... Mrachkovsky said: 'The hopes we have placed on
the collapse of the Pa'rty's policy must be considered
doomed. The methods of struggle used up to now have not
produ~ed any positive results. There remains only ·one .path
of struggle, and that is the removal of the leadership of the
Party and the Government by violence ... ' 'Seeing that I
agreed with him, Mrachkovsky, no longer having any fear
that I would not support him, went on to say: 'Stalin and the
other leaders of the Party and the Government must be removed. This is the principal task.'
"Right there, Mrachkovsky infomwd me that the Trotskyites had received instructions from Trotsky on Lhe necessity of organizing terroristic attempts on the·lives of the
leaders of the Party and the Government, that Trotsky, being
outside the Soviet Union, correctly defined the tasks of the
fight against the leadership of the C.P.S. U. At the same time,.
by the logic of the struggle, Mrachkovsky himself and other
Trotskyites had come to the conclusion that terrorism was
the only road of struggle remaining. . . . Smirnov eX:pressed
the same views as Mrachkovsky . . . . In conclusion Mrachkovsky and Smirnov proposed to unite the forces of th~
Trotskyites and Zinovievites and to JY!Oceed to create secret
terrorist groups for the purpose of committii{g terroristic
acts against the leaders of the Party and the Government.
.
(Vol. XXXVI, p. 10.)
1

Similar evidence was also given by a member of the Moscow
terrorist centre, /. I. Reingold, who testified as follows:
" ... I met Kamenev in the second half of 1933 and also in
1934 in his apartment in Ka!'m11.nitsky pereulok, in Moscow.
Ui

Kamenev appraised the,situation m appiroxiin.ately the same
way as Zinoviev and backed his conclusions by an analysis
cf the economic and poHtical situation in the country.
Kamenev arrived at the conclusion that after all, things
were not moving toward catastrophe but were on the upgradie; therefore, ·all expectations of an automatic collapse
were groundless, and the leadership that had grown up was
made of too hard a granite to expect t'hat it would split of
itself. From this Kamenev drew the conclusion that the 'leadenship will have to be split.'
'iKamenev repeatedly quoted Trotsky as saying: 'the whole
matter is in the fop, therefore the top must be removed.'
"Kamenev advocated the neoessi:ty of a terrorist struggle and primarily the necessity of killing Stalin, pointing
out that this was the only w.ay of coming to power. I
particularly remember his cymcal remark that 'heads are
peeuiiai:- in that they do not grow on again.'
"Kamenev propooed that terrorist gunmen be trained. He
said that the ·distinguishing feaiure of the new bloc compared with the previous opposition bloc was the adoption of
energeti.e terroristic action."
(Vol. XX VII, p. 61.)

He further said:
" ... I have already stated above that the Trotskyite-ZinovieVlite united bloc had no new pol>itiea·l program.
H based itseif upon the old threadbare platform, ,and
none of the leaders of the bloc occupied -themselves with, or
were interested in the question of dirawi,ng up any kind of
political program that was to any degree complete and consistent. The only thing Lllat united this heterogeneous bloc
w.as the idea of a terrorist fight againS'!: t.'1.e leaders of the
Party and the Government.
"As a matter of fact the bloc was a counter-revolutionary
terrorist gang of assassins who strove io seize power in the
country by any means whatever."
(Vol. X.11:.VII, pp. 72-73.)
13

The accused l. N. Smirnov, during examination on Aug. 5, 1936,
also ·admitted that he had met Sedov, L. Trotsky's son, while he
was in Berlin as far back as 1931.
I. N. Smirnov stated:
" ... In the course of our conversation, L. Sedov, analysing
the situation in the Soviet Union, expressed the opinion that
under the present conditions only the removal by violence
of the leading persons in the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet.Government could bring about a change in the general situation in
the country...."
·
" ... I a<Imit that the attitude which regarded terroTism
as the only way of changing the situation in the Soviet Union
was known to me from a conversation with Sedov in Berlin in
19.31 as his own personal position. .I. admit that .this line
<>n terrorism was confirmed by L. Trotsky in 1932 in .hiS.
personal instructions conveyed to me through Y. Gaven.
"I admit that Ter-Vaganyan, who with my knowledge con·.
ducted negt>tiations with the Leftists and the Zinovievites in
the name of the Trotskyite group, formed in 1932 a bloc·..with
Kameliev, Zinoviev and fue Lominadz.e group for joint struggle against the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet Government, and that
L. Trotsky's instructions regarding terror against the leaders
of the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet state were made the basis of.
this bloc." (Vol. XXIX, pp. 93, 104.)
The accused V. A. Ter-Vaganyan confirmed this evidence of
the accused Smirnov, admitting his participation in the united
centre, as well as the participation in this centre of the accused .
1. N. Smirnov, Mrachkovsky, Zinoviev and Kamenev.
The accused Ter-Vaganyan admitted that:
"The Trotskyite organization headed -by I. N Smirnov,
in its counter-revolutionary activities, particularly fostered
hatred and animosity against the leaders of. the C.P.S.U. . . .
It was on this hatred "Uiat the bloc ~as founded.•.•"
{VoL xxxvm, p. 11.1
The accused Ter-Vaganyan also a<Imitted that as far back as
1931.
17

"Sedov received from Trotsky special instructions for
l. N. Smirnov and the underground Trotskyites in the
U.S.S.R. to adopt the most active and sharp methods of
struggle against the Party and its leadership."
(Vol. xxxvm, p. 27.}
Confi..rming the evidence of the accused Alrachkovskg on this.
y·vh1~, the lltCC".lsed Ter-Vagangan testified:

"Mrachkovskg is right when he says that the TrotskyiteZinovievite bloc itself was really organized on the basis of the
recognition tha.i it was necessary to fight the leadership of the
Party and the Government by terroristic methods.''
(Vol.XXXVIII, p. 32.)
11.mr;, t.liere is no doubt left that the Trotskyile-Zinovievite bloc

noo t.:;&~;ed iiaro a group of unprincipled, political adventurers
F&.d ~a,•.sfos striving at only one thing, namely, to make their way

fa power even through terrorism.

Sucll is ilie s.!;le and exhaustive "program" of this association
of political ~si!:s,
Concerning terrorism as the sole basis on which the union
of !he T.rotskyites and Zinovievites took place in 1932, evidence
W!!l8 given at the preliminary investigation also by the accused
R. V. Pickel. During the ex:m>J'!mtion on July 23, Pickel testified:
" ... According to the information conveyed to us by Reingald in the beginning of 1934, the all-Union united counterrevolutionary centre of the Trotskyitc-Zinovieviteblocdecided
by the efforts of the Trotskyites and Zinovievites to strikE>
a crnshing blow at the C.P.S.U. by committing a number of
terroristic acts with the aim of beheading the leadership and
seizing power.
"The all-Union centre of the Trolskyite-Zinovievite bloc
then bluntly raised the question of the necessity of 'surgical
intervention' (meaning terrorism) in order to bring about a
decisive change in the situation in the country. For this purpose the centre gave instructions to start selecting people
who nursed particularly bitter feelings against the Party
!eadership, who had very strong will power and were capable
18

of carrying out terroristic attempts on the lives of the leaders
of the C.P.S.U."
(Vol. XXV, p. 65.}
In conformity with the course taken by the Trotskyite-Zinovievite underground bloc of seizing power by any mearis, the members
of thi'iJiloc widely practised double-dealing as the special and main
method in their relations towards the Party and the Government.
They brought this double-dealing. to monstrous dimensions, and
transformed it into a system that might rouse the envy of any
Azef and Malinovsky, of any secret service with all its spies, provocateurs and agents for diversive activities.
One of the principal aims of the Trotskyite-Zinov.ievite bloc was
in every possible way to conceal and mask its counter-revolutionary activities and the organization Olf terror.istic acts.
On this point the accused Reingold testified:
" ... Jn 1933-34 Zinoviev told me when I was alone with
him in his -apartment that: ' .•• The principal practical task
is to organize the terroristic work so secretly as to preclude
our being com,promised in any way.... •
"'. . . When under examination the main thing is persistently to deny any connection with the organization. If
accused of'terroristic activities, you must emphatically deny it
and argue that terror is incompatible with the views of
Bolsheviks-Marxists.'"
(Vol. XX.VII, pp. 110, 112.}
Similar instructions were given by L. Trotsky, who recommended that when terroristie acts were committed they should be
disavowed and "a position should be taken up analogous to that
taken up by the Central Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionaries.
toward Madame Kaplan" who shot at V. I. Lenin.
Another reason why the united centre resol'ted to profound
secrecy and· carefully masked its terroristic activities was that on~
of its ~ims was to betray the vigilanc; of the working· class and
the masses Qf the toilers. While preparing the as..assination of Comrade Stalin and other leaders of the C.P.S.U., the united centre simultanOO'J.Sly strove by all means in its power to give assurances of its
loyalty and even devotion to the Party and the Soviet Power, of
its repentance of past mistakes and of its readiness to serve
19

lhe Proletarian Revolution honestly. The leaders of the_ united centre figured that having been "forgiven" they could, after killing
Comrade Stalin, utilize this "forgiveness" to come into power. On
this point the accused Reingold testified:
" .•. They believed-:-I am speaking_of the leaders.of the
Trotsltyite-Zinovievite centre-that the fact that we were forgiven while Stalin was still alive, the fact that confidence was
placed in us, _would ensure our coming nearer to the leadership and to power; and following this, after Zinoviev, Kamenev and their supporters had come into power, they would
ensure the return also of Trotsky to the leadership and to
power."
(Vol. XXVII, p. 168.)
This was also testified to during examination by the accused
K·amenev:
" ... "\Ve discussed! this question more th~n once. We out- lined and decided on two possible ways for the leaders of the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc to come to power.
"The first, and what seemed to us to he the most feasible
way, was that after a terroristic act had been committed against Stalin, there would ensue confusion in the leadership of the Party and the Government, and negotiations
would be opened with us, the leaders of the Zinovievite bloc
and in the first place with Zinoviev, Kamenev and Trotsky.
"We assumed that in these negotiations, myself and Zinovicv would occupy the leading positions in the Party and the
country, for even with Stalin we, by our policy of douhledealing, had obtained, after all, forgiveness of our mistakes
by the Party and had been taken back into its ranks, while
our participation, that is min~ Zi-noviev's and Trotsky's, in
the terroristic acts would remain-:Secret from the Party ·and
the -country.
"The second way by which we could seize power, and
which seemed to us to be less reliable, was that after a
terroristic act had been committed against Stalin, the leadership of the Party and the country would be thrown into a
state of uncertainty and disorganization.
20

"The leaders of the Trotskyite-Zinovie\'ite bloc would be
able to fake advantage of the confusion to compel the remaining leaders of the Party to admit us to power or else to yield to
us their places.
"Trotsky's appearance and his active participation in the
~truggie for power were taken as a matter of course.•·
(Vol. XV, pp. 33-34.)
The united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre took the path of terrorism under the direct influence of L. D. Trotsky, who personally
gave the members of the united centt:e a number of verbal and.
written instructions to this effect.
During examination on July 20, 1936 the·accused S. V. MrachJ;ovsky testified:
". . . We Trotskyites adopted the policy of terrorism long
before the bloc with Zinoviev and Kamenev was formed. In
1931, when I. N. Smirnov was in Berlin and established
contact with L. Trotsky, instructions were received from the
lat~r to proceed to the organization of action groups of
Trotskyites."
(Vol. XVIII, pp. 40, 41.}
This same Mrachkovsky stated:
" ... According to the instructions of L. Trotsky received
in 1931 by-I. N. Smirnov, we were to kill Stalin, Voroshilov
and Kaganovich. Stalin was to be killed first."
(Vol. XVIII, p. 42.)
On Trotsky's attitude towards forming, a united TrotskyiteZil).ovievite bloc and adopting t~rroristic methods of struggle, the
accused Mwchkovsky testified as follows:
" .•. -In the middle of 1932, I. N. Smirnov put before our
leading trio the question of the necessity of uniting our organ~
ization with the Zinoviev-Kamenev and Shatskin-Lominadze
groups ... It was then decided to consult L. Trotsky on this
question and to obtain his directions. L. Trotsky replied;
agreeing to the formation of a bloc on the condition that the
groups uniting in the bloc would agree to the necessity of
21

removing by violence the leaders of U1e C.P.S.U. and Stalin
in the first place."
(Vol. XVIII, pp. 44, 45.)
This evidence of Mrachkovsky was fully confirmed by the accused Dreitzer who during examination testified:
" ... On the direct instructiOIDS of L. Trotsky, our aM~Union
c;entre m the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc was to prepare and
carry out the assassination of Stalin and Voroshilov for the
purpose of beheading the leadership of the C.P.S.U. and the
Red Army."
(Vol. X, p. 99.)

In 1934, the accused Dreitzer personally received written instructions from Trotsky, through L. Trotsky's son, Sedov; to prepare and carry out a terroristic act against Comrade Stalin. This
letter was written personally by Trotsky. According to Dreitzer's
testimony the contents of this letter were as follows:
"Dear friend. Convey that today we have the following
main tasks before us:
"1) To remove Stalin and Voroshilov.
"2) To unfold work for organizing nuclei in.1he army.
"3) In the event of war, to take advantage of every setback
and confusion to capture the leadership."
The accused Dreitzel' stated that "the letter ended with instructfons to keep Trotsky informed of the progress of the work done in
fulfilment of fue albove instructions. I must add that these ~struc­
tions of Trotsky f.ully confirmed the instructions I received from
Mrachkovsky in May 1934."
(,Vol. X, pp. 102, 103.)
This letter was addressed by Trotsky to Dreitzer peraonally ti.I
to one of the people mostdevoted to him, and who at one time was
chief of his personal bodyguard.
Dreitzer handed this letter to Mrachkovsky, who, according to
the testimony of Dreitzer and of Mrachkovsky himself, eventually
destroyed it for reasons of secrecy.
In addition to the above-mentioned letter, Trotsky sent to the
Trot.tkyite-Zinovievite centx!-l a number of other verbal and written
instructions concerning terrorism. In particular, he handed to the
accused Holtzman instructions of this nature when he met him per22

sonruly. Holtzman, served as a liairon man between L. Trotsky and
the Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre.
The investigation has est8blished that after the smash-up of the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre in connection with the murder of Comrade Kirou, L. Trotsky himself a.ssumed the leadership of terroristic
activities in l:he U.S.S.R. Wlld began strongly lo press forwaro the
organization of the assassinations of Comrades. Stalin and Voroshilov. For this purpose he took steps to restor~ the terrorist groups
in the U.S.S.R. and to stimuJ.ate. their activity by sending a number
-0f his "t!"ied agents to the U.S.S.R. f.rom abroad and aiso by using
for this purpo~ persons belonging to underground Trotskyite orglll!lizations in !!he U.S.S.R. who went abroad ostensibly on official
business.
The investigation has established that at various times the.following accused persons were sent from Berlin to Moscow as s~ch
agents: V. Olberg, Berman-Yurin, Fritz David (Kruglyansky),
Moissei Lurye, Nathan Lurye. and several otlhers who received directly from L. D. Trotsky and his son Sedov (L. L. Trotsky) instructions to organize at all costs the assassinations of Comrades
Stalin, Voroshilov, Kaganovich and other leaders of the Party.
One of these Trotskyite agents, V. Olberg, who arrived in the
U.S.S.R. with the passport of a citizen of the Republic of Honduras,
stated when arrested and examined:

"... AS I have already testified, I began active Trotskyite
work at the beginning of 1930. In addition to the persons I have enumerated, I was personally connected with
Trotsky and his son Lev Sedov; I carried out a num;ber of
assignments given me personally by Trotsky in connection
with the Trotsky1te organization, and I Wl!.S his emissary in
Germany. As Trotsky's emissary in Germany, I carried on
work in the Trotskyite organization in Berlin and also maintained secret connections with the Soviet Union. I maintained
connections with the Soviet Union using addresses and places
which Lev Sedov indieated to me."
(Vol. XXi, p. 24.)

to

,,;

V. Olberg admitted that he arrived in the U.S.S.R. illegally for
the purpose of carrying on Trotsky.He counter-revolutionary work
23

and of -Organizing a ierrorisi:ic act against Comrade Stalin;
During examination on February 21 of this year, V. Olberf1
te5tified thftt during one of his meetings with L. Trotsky's son, Sedou, the latter showed him a letter from Trotsky in which Trotsky
proposed that Olberg be sent to the Soviet Union with a group of
German Trotskyites for the purpose of preparing and organizing
the mW"der of Stalin.

" ... In this letter," V. Olberg goes on to say, "Trotsk!J
wrote to Sedou stating that he fully agreed with his p:roposa~
that I he sent to the Soviet Union. Trotsky wrote that he considered me to be an absolutely suitable person who could be
fully relied upon iI1 so perilous a matter."
To this Olberg added:__

"Sedov 1said io me that it was my duty to conceal by every
possilile means Trotsky's role in the organization Of a terrorc
istic act agairui: Stalin, and that even if I were arrested in
circum,stances in which my role of a terrorist would be ahso,
lutely obvious, I ·was to conceal the fact that I was a Trotsky 7
ite and was commitlli;!g the terroristic act on _Trotsky's instructions."
(Vol. XXI, pp. 77, 78.)
As the investigation hao; established, V. Olberg arrived in the
U.S.S.R. with the passport of a citizen of the Repuhlic of Honduras
obtained with the aid of the German Secret Police (Gestapo).
On this point V. Olberg, during examination in the office' of the
State Attorney of the U.S.S.R., testified

" ... Sedou promised to help me to obtain a passport to return to the )J.S.S.R. once more. But I succeeded in obtaining
a passport with the help of my younger brother, Paui 01berg. Thanks to my connections with the German police and
their agent in Prague, V. P. Tukalevsky, I, by means of a
brilie, Olbtained the passport of a citizen of the Republic of
Honduras. The money for the passport-13,000 Czechoslovakian kronen-I obtained from Sedov, or rather, from the
Trotskyite organization on Sedou's instructions."
(Vol. XXI, p. 262.)
24

Re..examined on the question of his com1ection with the Ges·

fap0, V. Olberg on July 31 of this year testified:
"Confulming also my testimony of May 9 of this year, I
emphasize that my connection with the Gestapo was not
at all an exception; of which one could speak as of
the fall ~f an individual Trotskyite. It was the liiie of the
Trotskyites in conformity with the instructions of L. Trot~kg
given through Sedov. The connection with the Gestap<>
, followed the line of organizing terrorism in the U.S.S.R:
against the leaders Qf the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet Gov·
ernment."
'' ..• Several times I met a promint'nt official of the Ge.
stapo, whose name was not mentioned to me, and I did not
con~ider it convenient to inquire. With this official I dis·
cussed my fust journey to Moscow and my plans concerning
the preparation of a terroristic act. This officj.al knew m:v
brother as an agent of the Gestapo to whom he advised me
to apply for help whenever necessary."
(Yol. XX.I, pp. 263-264.)
This testimony of V. Olberg was fully confirmed by Paul
Olberg, ·also an agent of the German Secret Police, arrested in
connection with another case. It was Paul Olberg who put his
brother V. Olberg, as both of them testify, in touch with the Ges.,
tapo and helped V. Olberg to obtain from the Gestapo the passport
of a citizen of the Republic of Honduras, which figures as an
exhibit. in the· present case.
. .
.Paul Olberg also confirmed the fact that v: Olberg's journey t<>
the U.S.S.R. was organized with terroristic purposes. During examination on May 16 this year, Paul Olberg testified:

r

" ... Valentine Olberg informed me that an official of the
German Secret Police told him that <all persons taking part in
preparing and committing terroristic acts would be given r~
fuge in Germany."
·
(Vol. XX.IV, p. 231.)
Another Trotskyite agent, sent to the U.S.S.R. with terroristie
ta:sks, namely Berman·Yurin, testified:
25

" ... My own role was that I arrived in the U.$.S.R. as
a person particularly trusted !by Lev Davidovich Trotsky
willi a special mission and instructions from him."
{Vol IV, i;'· 30.)
A.s the investigation has established, this "special mission and
jnstruc.tions" were to organize the 'assassination of Comrade Stalin.
"TI;,,Js was admitted by ilJhe a(:lCUS&<i Berman-Yurin, who testified tJiat,
'.Oll meeting L. Trotsky in Copen~en, he received from Trotsky di·
:reQtions to kill CoIJlI'ade Stalin.
" ... During this conversation," said the ac;:cu.sed BermanYurin, "Trotsky openly said to .me that in the fight against
Stalin, one must not hesitate to re5ort to extreme measures,
and that Stalin must be physically de.~troyed.".
(Vol. IV, p. 36.)
" ... Trotsky emphasized that the, attempt must be pre·
pared very carefully and circumspectly and ·Should be timed
with some big political event of international importance. It
would he most preferable, if the opportunity arose, to make
the attempt coincide with -some plenum or the congress of the
Comintem. Trotsky stated thait sueh a terroristic act ~m­
mitted at a congress or plenum W()uld immediately assume
the nature of an international political event; it would rouse
the masses far beyond the frontiers -0f the U.S.S.R. anll
would give rise to a powerful movement.
"Trotsky told me that this terroristic act against Stali11
must· not be committed'. secretly,. qn the quiet, but that tbj)
assassination m'USt be committed publicly, before an in·
ternational forum."
{Vol. IV, Jll?· 38, 3!!.)

Simultaneously with Bcrman·Yurin, [,. Trot.~ky sent also tht"
accused Fritz David (I. I. Kruglyansku) to the U.S.S.R. to prepare
terroristic acts.
In the autumn of 1932, Fritz David (I. I. Kruglycmskg) also
had a m~Jng with L. Trotsky, arranged ·for him by Sedov. In
-conversation with him, Trotsky proposed that Fritz David (I. I.
Kruglganskg) undertake, as he expressed it, the "historic mission"
of killing Stalin.

Fritz David (I. I. Kruglyanskg) testified:
" ... Wheii proposing that I go to the U.S.S.R. to kill Stalin,
Trotsky advised me, for the sake of secrecy, not to maintain
open connections with the Trotskyites but outwardly to adhere to the policy of the Central Committee of the Commun 7
dst Party of Germany.
"This conversation with Trotsky took pla<;e in November
1932 and I accepted his proposal to kill Stalin."
(Vol. ym, p. 73.)
On arriving in the U.S.S.J.'\. Berman-Yurin found Fritz David
(I. I. Kru!l{yansky) at an address .given him by Sedov. Fritz David
(I. I. :Kruglyansky) and Berman-Yurin decided to carry out the· assassiriation of Comrade Stalin at the Seventh Congress of the Comintern. This, however, they fail.ed to do owing to the fact that
Berman..;Yurin was unable to get into the Congress, while Fritz
David (I. I. Kruglyansky), although lie got into the Congress, could
not carry out his criminal intention because he sat far away from
the presiidium and illad no oppor.bunity of getting near to Comz-ade Stalin.
As both of the accused admitted during the investigation, Fritz
David (I. I. Kruglyansky) was to have shot Comrade Stalin at the
Seventh Congress with a Browning pistol whkJh he had 'l"eceived
from Berman-Yurin.
(Vol. VIII, p. 77.)
The investigation haJS also established that the terrorist group
l1eaded by Trotsky's aigent, Moissei Lurye, whom Trotsky sent into
the U.S.S.R. from abroad, was actually organized by the active
German fascist Franz Weitz, the representative of Himmler, at that
time the leader of the fascist SS Detachments and now the director
of the German Secret Police (Gestapo).
· On this point M. Lurye, examined on July 21, stated:

"Nathan Lurye replied that he was still, as before, a convinced Trotskyite_ . and he reported that a terrorist group,
s~all in number, hut very reliable, had been organized here
bi Moscow in April 1932....
27

" ... When I asked oil whose instructions and at whose
initiati.ve this action group had been organized, N. Lurye
answered that the action group was created by ·a certain
Franz Weitz ..."
" ... When I asked who was Franz l-Veitz, N. Lurye, at
first very unwillingly, answered as follows: Franz Weitz is
an active member of the National-Socialist Party in Germany 13i1ld a irusted man of Himmler (the present director
of the Gestapo in Germany).· At th·at time Himmler was the
leader of the 'SS'-Blackshlrt Guards..."
" ... The main task of the group, according to Weitz, was
to prepare terroristic acts against Stalin, Kaganovich, Voroshilov and Orjonikidze . •.."
(Vol. XXXII, pp. 243, 244.),
The accused M. Lurye communicated to Zinoviev in detail N,
Lurye's r~rt,.d~iring t.o ascertain Zinoviev's attitude towiards
connections with the fascists andi the German Secret Police.
After listening to M. Lurye's communication, Zinoviev replied:
"What is there in this to disturb you? You are a historian;
'Jlloissei llyich, you know the ·case of Lassalle and Bismarck,
when Lassalle wanted to use Bismarck in the interests of the
revolution."
"• .• By means of this historical parallel," added M. Lurye.
"Zinoviev wanted to prove the possibility and the necessity
of utilizing an alliance with the National-Socialists 'in the
.fight again:st the C.P.S.U; and.the Soviet Government."
(Vol. XXXII, p. 252.)

M. Lurye's testimony was fully confinµed by N. Lurye, who;
q~g examination on July 21 testified as foll~ws:

"I must admit that from the autumn of 1932 to the ·end
of 1933 the terrorist action group of which I was the head,

was acti~ely preparing a terroristic act against the People's
Comm~sar of Defence, Voroshilov ••• •"

"·.,I was commissioned to do this by Franz Weitz, a German engineer-architect, member of the National-Socialist
28

Party of Germany, representative of Himmler, now director
of the Gestapo}'
" ... In August 1932, leaving for Germany for hi~ vacation,
Franz Weitz put me in charge of the terrorist action groµ.p
and set before me the task of preparing and carrying out terroristic acts against Stalin, Kaganovich and Vo.rosl1ilav."
(Vol. XXXIII, pp. 141-142.)
Thus the accused M. Lurye and N. Lurye, by establishing direct
organizational contact with the German fascists and the Ger·
man Secret Police, betrayed the interests of the Soviet State and
committed treason against their country.
Fin~y, the circilmstances established by the investigation
sho"Y that L. Trotsky, Zinoviev, Kamenev and others, the leaders
of tlie Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc, in their fight against the Soviet
(}overmnent sank so low that their morals proved to be ·more contemptible than thoSc of gangs of the most hardened criminals;
While organizing terroristic acts ag3.inst the leade~s of the C~P.S.U.
and the Soviet State, the leaders of lhe united centre. simultaneously were preparing to exterminate their own terrorist. agents, in
order completely to wipe out all traceS of their crimes.
On this point the accused Reingo.ld testified as follows:

"Zinoviev ·and Kamenev did not exclude the possibility
that the O,G.P. u. was in possession of the threads of the COD•
spiracy agafost the State which was. being prep:q:ed by them.
Therefore they regarded it as their most important .task to
destroy every possible trace of the crilnes committed. For
this purpose it was proposed to appoint Bakayev chairman
of the O.G.P.U. He was to be charged with the function of
physically exterminating the persons who directly carried out
terroristic acts against Stalin and Kirov, as well as those
workers of the 0.G.P.U. who might be in possession of the
threads of the crimes committed."
(Vol. XXVII, pp. 163-164.)

R: The Unittd .Trotskyifr-Zir.tovievite Centre and the AssasBination
of Comrade S. M. Kirov
ll was- already established·in the case of .Nikolagev, Rumyantstl>,, Kotolynov and others shot by sentence of the Military Colle-

gtum of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. on the charge of mur4j~ring Comrade S~ M. Kirov on December 1, 1934, that direct con-

n:ecttons existed between the group of Zinovievites in Leningrad
1rho colll'dDt1ed the murder, and the aecu'!ed Zinoviev, Kwnerie~
an4 &tkdfFo, . already convicted in the ClMe ()f the so-ca,lled
"MoSOG'tt ceatre."

At the present time, the investiS'llting authorities are in possession Gf facts esbblbiiing beyond doobt. that the murder of S. M.
Eil'IW was .commillted fu ~oe With the deeisioti of the uttited
T.robl.yite-ZiM'rievite centftl.
This was _adnlitted at ~ pl"i!limhiary ili\l'estlgrdi<Jn by the majelit)' of~actrve memben of V!ll'iolls tetroti8t Trotskyite-Zino'riev!te
. groups. inclading the a~ Zi1t0¥1il!r>, Kame~v, Evdoklrnovr
Bokapor Nntehkoaukg And others.
Tbe aemsed Er>ifoki'tMv fttlly confirm~ this by declaring
at the exai:ninauOO on Aug. 10 fYl this year the following:

"_ ... At the trial of the Kirov murder case, I-Evdo-

Jdaiov, with Zinoviev, Kamentv, Blikayev, Gertik and othel'll,
•ceiftd the GQ'Vernment authorities and th~ Court by coneelllilig that tbe tnutder of Kitov was prepared and carried
dill by m, ~ ~ of the Trt>tskyite-Z.inovievite bloc.
..The murder of :KirlW was colt1n'litted by the Leningrad
lerrorist centre on the direct instructions of the united cen~ of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc.
lVol. XXXVJ, p. 6.)
" .•. In .1984, Zinoviev, acting in the namE'. of-tbe Trotskyite•Zincwi~te organbation, gave Bakr1yeu dfrect instructions
to or.ganin the miu'der of Kirov.
In additi0n to Zinozlev those tak!.ng pairt In tM deeision t<>
·--~ Cuou; ~luded Kamenev, m.yse!r-Evdokiinov,
Bakauev, and also representatives of the Trotskyites in tlle
penona of Mrachkovskg and Ter-Vaganyan. In order to pre- ·
pen the mmder, Bakagev went to Leningrad in the autumn
of 1984 and there established contact with the active mem11

hers of om- org:mfaation: Kofolynm>, Levin, Rumymils~,..
Mandelstamm .and Myasnikov, who formed the so-called Leningrad terrorist centre. The Leningrad centre had an acti:ve
group of terrorists, directly enJgaged in prepamtkms I.or the
muroer of Kirnv."
(Vol. XX.."'\.VI, ,p..•&.)
After obdurate denials, the accused Zinoviev, convicted! by the
testimony of a number of other accused, had to admit lliat as
far back as 1932 the united T:rotskyite-Zilloviev.Ue centre had decided to org~-iize tenoristic acis against Co:m.i!'ade Stalin in M~w
and against Comrad¢ Kirev in Len.in.grad.
"In the autumn of 1932," stated the al!:cused ZinOfl!iw;••m
my villa at J!yins:lwye, in the preiien~ of Kti.menw, ~
Evdokizlior.Y and Karev, l in11truded BakGyev oo ~ :Q
terroristic act against Staii:a, and Kn~ tv pi:epaie a ~
istic act against Kirov."
(Vol. .i':E gb"; ~

The accused Zinoviev testified;
"In 1934, I do not remember the eKact Ill(mth, m~
middle of the year, Evdokimov informed me of one of Gertik' s tr~s to LeniI!Jgraid during wh.i.eh Gertik este:bU.shed
contact .with Kotolynou. As a result of iliis mee~ Kofolg.nov told Gertik that he was taking a direct part m. the preparations forthe assassination of Kirov." (Vol XII. pp. 37, 38.}

This was also testified by the accused Kam.enev, who confirmed. the fact_ that a conference had taken place in Ilyfuskoye at
wltjch it was decided to commit terroristic acts against Comrades
Stalin and Kirov. The accus.ed Kamenev testified:

·''I must admit that before th1! conference in Ilyinskoye,
Zinoviev infurin'ed me
the p~d deci!>iODS of the centre of the Troiskylte-.Zb\ovievite ~01! to organize terroristic
acts a~im\Stalti1 i!Dd Klro£t, ~ing that the r.!J>l'eSenta·
ti-t'es of the TtbtSk'y<ite$ m the cent-re of the Mee, Sltdrnov,
Ml'CrChkovskr; and Tel-Vagttn~n, etnpil!lti~mn!dl;ted oo this
decision, that they had direct instructions~~ tnfi'ltte!' from

ot

~l

Trotsky, and t',hat they demanded that a start be made in putting these measures into practice in pursuance of those principles wJ!ich formed the basis of the bloc."
(Vol. XV, pp. 15, 16.)
To this the accused Kamenev added:
"I joined in this decision being in full agreement with it."
(Vol. XV, p. 16.}
. As the investigation has established, the practical fulfilment of
the plrui to or.g3!1lize the murder of Comrade Kirov w;:is assigned
by the united centre to I. P. Bakayev, a member of that centre.
Direct evidence on. this is given by the accused Zinoviev, who
admitted that it was. precisely Bakayev who had been instructed
by Zinoviev, in .the name of the united CP.ntre, t~ organize the
terroristic acts against Comrade · Stalin in Moscow and agai:mt
(Vol. XII, p. 36.)
Comrade Kirov in Leningrad.
Detailed evidence on the role played by Zinoviev, Bakayev anrl
the whole of the united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre in the murder of Comrade. S. M. Kirov was given by fhe accused Reingold,
who stated the followihg:
"I learned personally from Zinot>ia• tb::lt the assassination
of Kirov in· Leningrad was p·repared on his direct instructions and on the instructions of the ccnfre of the·TrotskyiteZinovievite bloc. During this conversation. wi!l!h- Zinoviev,
which took place in his apartment in AugQst 1934, he, as I
haive already stated, reproached the Moseaw action group
for being slow and not sufficiently active.
"In giving the reasons for the necessity of committing a terroristic act against Kirov, Zinoviev said that Kirov must be
physically destroyed as Stalin's closest assistant. He also
added: 'It is not enough to fell the oak; all the young oaks
growing around it must .be felled too.' Another argument
Zinoviev used in support of the necessity of murdering Kirov
w:as that Kirov was the leader of the ·Leningrad organization
and was personally responsible for th~ rout of the opposition

iµ Leningrad.

"As I have. already stated,· the Leningrad fighting organization was under the direct lea<lership of Bakayw. Organizational connection with "t!tj.s' organization was. alsO maintained iby FaiiJilOvlch."
Wol. xXVII, p. ·10.)
After persistent denials of his participation in the organizationof the assassination of Comrade Kirov, the accused Bakagev,
imder the weight of evidence brougJ:it a~ainst him,: testified:

"I admit that Zinoviev person:iny instructed me, .fo organize the assassination of Stalin in Moscow, and Karev ~o or•
ganize the a;sassination of Kirov in Lenmgrad/:For-tliis purpose I· instructed Karev to establish eontact ill Letiingra,d
~th Vladimir Levin and Anishev.• members of the organiz·
atiori, while Zinoviev instructed me to put Karev in toullh also .
with Rumyantsev in Leningrad."
(\'ol. I; p. 89.)
Evidence on .fhe role played by Bakagev as one of 'the prin·
dpal · orgariizers Off the assassination of Comrade Kirov was aJsO. '
givenlby N. A. Karev, who is under .arrest in connection with a~other
case. At the examination
5, 1936, N. A. ~arev stated:
.
.
. held on July
..
.
~-

"Zi'noviev said th~t Bakagev had bren charged witµ~:
preparation of terroristic acts against Stalin and Ki~oo and
that for· this purpose he was
utilize his con~ections with'
the Zinovieviite groups in ~grad and Moscow."
To this Karev added:

to

:·1n

conversation wi'th Bakagev, I learned ·that the latter
intended to utilize the Zinovievite groups of'Rumuantaev and
Kotolynov in Leningrad with which he; Bakayell, had contact, f9~ the organization of a len'oristie ~ct against Kirov."
(Vol III, p. 11.}

This was also fully..CODf1rmed durios the_.iu:v.~Ugation l>y tlM
accused Evdokimou, who ~~:t!bt: (~w4\a:
"I learned .from Bakauev that in.the autum..ottdl, he..
Bakayev, together with one Trotskyite'terrorist. whose ~ame

sa

1 do not know, went to Leningrad to establish contact with
the Leningrad terrori\!!t centre and to organize the assassination of Kirov,
"While in Leningrad, BakageQ and the above-mentioned
Trotskyiie terrorist met Nikolayev and arranged '}'ith him
that he would assassinate Kirov."
{Vol. XXXVI, pp. 7, 8.)
And further:

"Bakagev stated that the terrorists had expressed confidence in the success of the terroristic act; they considered
themselves to be safe. The reason for this was that all of
them, including such active Zinovievites as 11umyantsev, Levin, Myasnikov, Mandelstamm and others, enjoyed the confidence of a number of leading Party workers and officials of
Soviet organizations in Leningrad. This ensured them every
possibility of pursuing their preparations for a terroristic act
against Kirov without the least fear of being discovered."
(Vol. XXXVI, p. 9.}
The iinvestf.gation has established that after the 'llllited Zinovievite-Trotskyite centre had adopted the decision to assassinate
Comrade S. 11'1. Kirov, Kamenev made a special journey to Leningrad in June 1934 fol" checking up on the progress of the work of
organizing the terroristic act against Comrade Kirov.
Zinoviev also pressed forward .in every way the a&Sassfoation of
Comrade Kirov and, as testified by N. M. Matorin, formerly Zinovievg private secretary, who is now under arrest in connection with
an.Qther ease, Zinoviev reproached the members of the terrorist
p-oup foll' being atow and.irresolute.
Jlaforin iremified:

e<Ztnoviev told me that fbe prepar.itions for the terroristic
act must be pressed forward to the utmost and that Kirov
must be killed by the wint«. Zinoviev reproached me for not
dkplaytng wfftcient determination and energy. He said that
with regard to terroristic methods of strug'gle prejudices must
(Vol. XIV, pp. 68, 64.)
be dropped."

III. Organization by the United Trotskyite-Zinovievite Centre of
Terroristic Acts Against Comrades Voroshilov, Zhdanov, Kayanovich, Kossior, Orjonikidze and Postyshev
The materials of the investigation have established that the
united Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist centre, afte!' it had. killed
Comrade Kirov, did not confine itself to. organizing the assassination of Comrade Stalin ailone. The terrorist Trotskyite-Zinovievite
centre simultaneously carried on work to organize assassinations of
other leaders of the Party, namely, Comrades Vuroshilov, Zhdanov,
Kaganovich, Kossior, Orjonikidze and Postyshev.
The accused Reingold testified that 'Zinoviev, while speaking of
the necessity of assassinating Comrade Kirov as Comrade Stalin's
closest assistant, added:
"It is not enough to fell the oak; all the young oaks growing around it must be felled too."
(Vol. XXVII, p. 70.)

According to Reingold's testimony:

"Zinoviev's main instructions amounted to the following:
the blow must be directed against Stalin, Kaganovich' and
Kirov."
(Vol. XXVII, p. 63.)
The accused Reingold confirmed that:
"The expectations of the united centre were based on a
plan to cause complete confusion in the Party and in the
country by a stunning simultaneous blow in Moscow and
Leningrad."
(Vol. XXVII, p. 163.)

f

Various terrorist groups operating un<ier the general leadership of the united centre attempted lo carry out the assassinations
of Voroshilov, Kaganovich, Zhdanov, Kossior, Orjonikidze and
Postyshev.
Thus, the organization of the terroristic act against Comrade
Voroshilov was the work of Dreitzer' 11 group, · which received
instructions to murder Voroshilov directly from Trotsky, and of
the group of the Trotskyite M. Lurye, which was sent over from
Germany for the same purpose.

Iri regard to the preparations f<Jr the assassinatioo of Con1rade

Voros.hiloo, the aecused Mracklwvsky, <me of the meinher:s of the
united centre te5tified:
"In the middle of 1934, E. Dre'itzer reported to me that
simultaneously he was organizing the assassination of Voroshilov, for which purpose Dimitri.Schmidt, who w.as a Commander in the army and under.no suspicion in the Party, was
to be' prepared. It was presumed that he would kill Voro•
shilov either while rep<>rting to him on service matters, or
during the. next manoeuvres at which Voroshilov would be
present."
(Vol. XVIII, p. 49.)

The accu5ed Dreitzer, examined at the office of the State
Attorney of the Soviet Uni-On on July 31, testified on this point:
"For the purpose of committing the terroristic act I
recruited Estermap and Gayevsky, and in 1935 ScllIIiidt and
Kuzmichev, The latter two undertook to kill. Voroshilov/'
(Vot X, p. 195.)
. The testimony of Mrachkovsky arid Dreitzer was also confirmed

l>y the accused Reingold, who testified as follows:
"I learned from Mrachkovsky and Dreitzer that .in the
summer of 1933 a Trotskyite group of military meil was organized under the leadership of Dreitzer. The group consisted
of Schmidt, commander of a brigade of the Red. Army, Kuzuiichev, chief of staff of a military unit, and a munber of
other persons whose n·ames I do not know. I learned from
Dreitzer that ·Schmidt and Kuzmichev were to carry out
personally the terroristic act against Voroshilov and that ·they
bad agreed to do ilo. It was planned that for this purpow
they would either take advantage of 8D official receptiOn by
Voroshilov, or of Voroshilov's.visit to one of their military
unit&" ·
{Vol. XXVII, pp. l6&; 166.)

Th~ in.v~tigation bas also established ~at hi the"same periOci,
a number of tei.forist groups. (those Or 'Dreitzer, M, "~urue
others) . were organizing attempts on -the lives . of C<>mra(ieii
Zhdanov,' Kaganovich, Orjontkldze, Koisior ·and Postfishtv .

.

8M

••

De{initi<m of· the Charge
Analyzing the above, the. investigating authorities consider ·a
established:.
1) That in the period of 1932-1936 a 'united Trotskyite~Zinov­
ievlte centre was organiz~ in the city of l\foscow with U1e object of
committing. a, number. of terroristic acts against ijie leaders of
the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet Government for the purpose of seizing
power.
2} That of those accused in the present case, G. E. Zinoviev,
L. B. Kameilev, G. E. Evdokimov and I. P. Bakayev entered the
united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre from the Zinovievites and I. N,
Smimov, v. A. Ter-Vaganyan and, S. V. Mrachkovsky from the
Trotskyites.
3) That during this period, the united Trotskyite-ZinovieYite
centre organized .number of ierrorisi groups and prepared a num ..
ber of practical measures to assassinate Comraqes Stalin, Voro~hi[.,,
ov, Zhdanov, Kaganovich, Kirov, Kossior, Orjonikidzc and Postgshev.
4) That one of these terrorist groups, operating on the d~t
instructions of Zinouiev and L. Trotsky and of the m1ited Trotsky·
ite-Zinovievite centre, and under the immediate direction of the accused Bakayev, carried out.the foul murder of Comrade S. M. Kirov
on Deceniber l, 1934.
The accused in this case: G. E. Zinoviev, L. B. KameneiJ,
G. E. Evdokimov, I. P. Bakayev, V. A. Ter-Va!Janyan, S. V. Mrachkovsky, E. A. Dreitzer, V. P. Olberg, Fritz David ·u. I. Kruglyansky), E. S. Holtzman, R. V. Pickel, I. I. Reingold, K. B . .Berma11Yurin, M. Lurye and N. Lurye have fully admitted their guilt of
the charges preferred ag·ainst them.
The accused 1. N. Sm'irnov, acknowledging his participation in
the uniled centre of the Trotskyite:Zino\iC\'ite bloc, his personal
connection with L. Trotsky ·and his meetings with L. Sedov while
abroad in 1931, and also the fact that he maintained connection
with Trot&ky right up to the time of his arrest in 1933, admitted
that in 1931 instructions were conveye'd to him by Sedov, aod con·
finned in 1932 by Trotsku to Organize terror again.st the leaders
of the C.P.S. U. and -the Soviet State and that these instruction!!
37

a

served as the basis of the organization ofthe Trotskyite-Zinovievite

bloc,
At the same time, the accused I. N. Smirnov categorically denies
that he took part in the terroristic activities of the united Trotsky·
ite-Zinovievite centre. However, the accused I. N. Smirnov is proved
tc have participated in the terroristic activities of the united centre
by the evidence of the aooused S. V. Mrachkovsky (Vol. XXIX,
pages 76-84), E. A. Dreitzer (Vol. XXXI, page 63), A. N. Safonova
(Vel. XXXI, page 295), I. I. Reingold (Vol. XXXI pages 138, 284),
G. E. Zinoviev (Vol. XII, page 35), L.B. Kamenev (Vol. XV, page 28),
G. E, Evdokimov (Vol. ·XXXVI, pages 9, 10), R. V. Pickel (Vol.
XXXI, page 78).
On the basis of the above:
1. Zinoviev, Grigori Evseyevidi, born in 1883, employee, convicted in 1935 in the Zinovievite "Moscow centre" case;
,
2.. Kamenev, Lev Borisovich, born in 1883, employee, convicted
in 1935 in the same "Moscow centre" case;
3. Evdokimov, Grigori.Eremeyevich, born in 1884, employee,
convicted in 1935 in the same "Moscow centre" .case;
4. Bakayev, Ivan Petrovich, horn in 1887, employee, convieted
in 1935 in the same "Moscow centre" case;
S. Mrachkovsky, Sergei Vitailevicli, iborn in 1888, employee;
6. Ter-Vaganyan, Vagarshak Amtymiovich, born in 1893, employee;
7. Smirnov, Ivan Ni!kitich, !born in 1880, employee
.......are accused of having, the first six in the period of 1932 to 1936,
and I; N. Smirnov since 1931
a) organized a number of terrorist groups which were making : '~';;.
prepuations to assassinate Comrades Stalin, Voroshilov, Zhdanov,
Kaganovich, Kirov, Kossior, Orjonikidze and P0 styshev;
b) organized and carried out on Dec. 1, 1934, the foul murder
~f Comrade S. M. Kirov, through the Leningrad underground
terrorist group of Nikolayev-Kotolym;>v and others; .
·
. i.e., of crimes covered. by Articles 588 and 5811 of the Criminal
Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
8. Dreitzfr, Ephim Alexandrovicli, horn. in 1894., employee;
9. Reingold, Isak Isayevicli, born in ~~97, employee;
10; Pickel, llichard Vitoldovich, born in 1896, employee;

38

After 1he reading of .the indictment, the President of the

Coo.rt questions in turn all the accused whether they plead guilty
as charged. The aooused Zinoviev,Kamenev. Evdc>kimov, Bakayev~
Ter-Vagany~ M.raeh.kovsky, Dreiitzer, Reingold, Piokel, Qllberg,
Beraiian-Yurin, Fritz David (Kruiglyaruky), M. Lurye and N. Lurye
plead guill.ty on all charges. The aocused. I. N.. Smirnov, admitting
that ·!be belonged to the uniteld oontre of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
bloc, 11hat he 'had been in personal. communication with Trotsky,
and had received.Trotsky's instruetions to organi2e terror a;gainst
the k>iaders of the c,.P.S.U. and the Soviet State, and -admitting his
political Tesp9nsibility for the activities of the united centre, denies
only his personad participatkm in the preparation and e:xecutio~
of terroriStic acts,
The a.ccused Hal'l:mnan admits having belonged to the Trots·
kyite-Zinovievite terrorist organization, haying been in personal
Contact with the Trotskyite centre abroad, and having brought
Trot.sky's personal instructions to organize terroristic acts in the
.U.S.S.R. He !denies only ihis own pers~al participation in the preparation of rerroristic acts.
After a recess of 15 minures, the court at 1:45 p.m. proceeds t<>
examine the accused.
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED MRACRKOVSK.Y

The accused Mracliikov:sky was the man most in the confidence
·of Trotsky and personally closest to him. In the past he had occupied iinportant position in the army. From 1923 onwards he had
carried on, in conjmiction with Trotsky, Trotskyite anti-Soviet
work. He had been a member of the leading centre of the underground Trotskyite terrorist organization, had worked under the
personal direction of Trotsky, from whom he was receiving in·
itractions through I. N. Smirnov as well as directly to organize
terroristic acts against the leaders of the Party and the Government
Being one of the leaders of the oounter-revolutionary Trotskyite
underground <Organization, he, in 1932, had joined the united
Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist centre together with I. N. Smirnov
and V. A. Ter.-Vaganynn.
Mrachkovsky relates in detail the history of the formation of
the Trolskyite-Zinovicvite terrorist centre. He says that on retum-

an

40

ing from exile in 1929 he only on paper admitted the correctness of
ilhe general liine of the Party; actually, however, together with othet
former members of the opposition, he returned from exile with the
perfidious intention of continuing the struggle against tj:le Party.
Asked by Comrade Vyshinsky to ~ay definitely to whom he. was re;
ferring, Mrachkovsky said that he, Mrachkovsky, and also I. N,
Smirnov and Ter-Vaganyan, had jointly taken the firm decision toorganize a further struggle against the Party. Mrachkovsky at the
same time admits that this counter-revolutionary .group had ·nopolitical platform, that "the platform drawn up in. the prece<ilng
period of 1925-27 was upset by the fact of the correctness of the
general line of the Party."
Mrac..likovsky .goos on to say that ailready in 1931 Hus Trotskyite
group openly discussed the·question of terrorism. I. N. Smirnov,
who had visited Berlin, brought back· instructions from Trotsky~
which he received through Trotsky's son, L. Sedov, to .the· following effect: "Until we put Stalin out of the way, we shall not be
able to come back to power."
Vyshinsky: What do you mean by the expression: "Until we
put Stalin out of the way''?
Mrachkovsky: Until we kill Stalin. At that very meeting, in the
presence of Smirnov, myself, Ter-Vaganyan and Safonova; I was
given the task of organizing a terrorist group, that is to say, to
select reliable people. The same task was assigned to· Dreitzer to- ·
gether with me. That period, 1931 and 1932, was spent in inducing
and preparing people to commit terroristic acts. For this purpose
I recruited Yatsek and Yudin. Dreitzer recruited another group of
people including Schmidt, 'Kuzmichev and some others WhQm I
don't remember. As I have already said, this perfod was spent in
preparing people for organizing terroristic .acts .against Stalin,
Voroshilov and· Kaganovich.
Mrachliovsky goes on to state that in the second half of 1932
the question was raised of the necessity of uniting the Trotskyite
terrorist group witfi the Zinovievites. The question of this unification was raised by I. N; Smirnov who, in doing so, argued that the
Trotskyite forces by themselves were too weak and that therefore
it was necessary to unite all counter-revolutionary groups. H:was
.at that time that Smirnov sent a letter tp Trotsky through HoltJ-

41

man in which ihe inlformed TrotStk.y of the state of the Trotskyite organization and put before him the question of uniting with
the Zinovievites. In the autumn of 1932 a letter was received from
Trotsky in which he approved the decision to unite with the Zinovievites. It was also at that time that Trotsky conveyed to them
through his emissary, Gaven, that union must take place on the
basis of terrorism, and Trotsky once again emphasized the necessity of killing Stalin, Voroshilov and lfrrov.
Vgshinskg: Another question to Smimov. Do you corroborate
ihe testimt>ny of Mrachkovsky that in 1932 you received a reply
from Trotsky through ·Gaven?
Smirnov: I received a reply from Trotsky through Gaven.
Vyshinsky: And in addition, did you receive verbal informawn on the conversation with Trotsky?
Smi.rnov: Yes, also verbal conversation.
Vgsh'insky: You, Smirnov, confirm before the Supreme Court
that in 1932 you received from Gaven :l!he direction from Trotsky
to commit acts of terrorism?
Smirnov: Yes.
Vyshiiisky: Against whom?
Smirnov: Against the leaders.
Vyshinsky: Against which?
Smirnov: Stalin and others.
Continuing his testimony, Mraohkovsky obsel"Ved that after re<ieiving the instructions from Trotsky approving the formation of
a bloc with the Zinovievites, Smimov instructed.Ter-Vaganyan to
brll\g about the formation of this bloc. The terrorist bloc of the
Trotskyites and the Zinovievites was formed at the end of 1932.
Mrachkovsky related that before his departure from Moscow in
1932, Smirnov had asked him to see Reingold, ·who was leading the
.Moscow terrorist group, and to come ta an agreement with him
about uniting all forces.
Vyshiruky: On what basis?
Mrachkovsky: On the basis of. organizing the assassination of
Stalin.
Vyshiruky: Smirnov said: Go to Reingotd and come.to an agreement with him about ...

42

M~acl-Jrovskg~ •.. Uniting our foITOrist forces for the purpose
of zssassim!,ting SWin, Voroohilov and Kaganovich.

Mradhkovsky goes oo to say that on bis departure from. Mos•
oow he instrno;~ed Reingold to get in touch with Dreitzer who was
to direct Lite terroi"istic activities of the Moscow centre. On arriving
in Moscow again in 'llhe summer of 193-1- he met DreitzeI' who in·
fo:rmed him shoui the woirk of fue terrorist centre. Questioned by
Comrade Vyshinsky, Drei.tzer confirms this statement by Mrach~
kovsky. Nl..racllkovsky goes on to say that Dreitzer informed him
about th~ organization of the Moscow teno.rist centre of the Trots~
kyite-Zinovievite bloc, consisting of himself, i.e., Dreitzer, and a1$0
Reingold :md Pickel Questioned by Comrade Vysbllisky, Reingold
and Pickel oonfum tih£ statement that they were memhei-s of ~e
Moscow terrorist centre.
fu the summer of 1934 Mrachkovsky met Katnenev. "Kamenw," testifies Mrachkovsky, "conikmed to me the fact thiit a Moscow ·ten-mist cenire had been oTgfillized. <Kamenev expressed dis~­
satisfaeilon wiih the slowness with which the work of preparing
ierroiristie acts was proceeding. Dwring this conversation he said.that Bakayev was organizing i.n LeningOO:d, apparently very sue·
cessfuliy, alihoogh slowly, a terroristic act against Kirov.'; -O:mtinuing ms testimony; Mraohkovsky states tlhat ~_Decere­
her 1934, whilie in Kazakhstan, he received; from Dreitzer a letter
-Of Trotsky's, written minvisible ink, which had ·approxdmately the
following contents-Dear. friend; tlb.e ta.Sk that confronts us today
is io accelerate
assassination Of Stalin and V:o~il~v. In t!h.e
event of war, it i.s neCessa.ry to -adopt a defeatist position and take
advantage of the eoitllfusion. Nuiclel mu«1t be organiied liin the Red
A..-my. The letter was signed "Starlk" (~la man).
· MramkoVsky emphasizes t'he fact that he 'knew Trotsky•s
hrundwriting very well and that he had not the slightest doi,Wt that

the

the

bi

letteJ;" ilacfactuSny been mitten ·TrOtsky. E:iiiphasizmg'tb.at
"be· 5-tOOld parti.oolal"ly clcse to Trotsky, Mracllko~y stat~ tJif:lt
dwmg the last few years of bis w<>rk: with TrOisky; iri. 192s-27, no
one ~-get. to see TiotU.y mth<iut b'mi,· Mrichkcilvslty;· anci18ls0
tha~ all Trotsky's oorresponden.ce passed through his hands:
Comrade Vyshmsky asks Mrachkovsky .whaf·rOie I. N<~&o.ir~
llloV.
ID' fue ~eITOrist Tfoiskyite:zbionevite CerifN,' '~~

pfayea

48

kovs}ty ellllI)h~sizes tb.at he, .~1r~hkovsky, 4id everything with
the knowledge'.of Smirnov !llld thatsinirnov knew the people whom
,J;1e; Mracbkovsky, .was preparing .to commit terroristic acts.
Q~eStion~ ·1by .Comrade Vys.hinsky whether he confirms
Mrnchkovsky'.s testimony, .Smimov asserts that Mrachkovsky's
.statements do· not- c~mform willh. the facts,
Vyshinsky: You were a member .of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
.¢entre. That you admit. Here Mrachk~vsky is :no~ sinning agaiinst
the truth; Thatis the first point. Secondly, the cen:tre was organized
~the.basis of terrorism against the leaders of the Party and the
government. Is that right? .
.
.Smirnov: That is right.
Vyshinsky: Did you receive from Trotsky instructions on terrorism as a means of struggle?
Smirnov: Ye.,.
Mrachkovsky then goes on to tell the Court about the activities
of the Trotskyi.te-Zinovievite terrorist centre. The members of this
centre we:r.e Zinoviev,. Kamenev, Lominad1,e, Mraohkovsky, Ter7
.
Vagapyan and others.;
Comrade Vyshinsky t!hen asks- Zinoviev:
Vyshinsky: When was the IUDited centre organized?
Z.inoviev: In the summer of 1932.
Vyshinsky: During what period of time did it function?
Zinoviev: Actually-up to 1936.
Vyshinsky: What were its activities?
Zinoviev: Its main activities consisted in milking preparations
ior terroristic acts.
Vyshinsky: Against whom?
Zinoviev: Against the leaders.
Vgshlnsky: That is, against Comrades Stalin, Voroshilov, and
Kaganovich? Was it your centre that organized the assassination
of Comrade Kirov? \Vas the assassination of Sergei Mironovich
Kirov organized by your centre, or by some other organization?
Zinoviev: Yes, by our centre.
V111hi118k1J: In that centre there were you, Kamenev, Smirnov,
Mrachkovsky and 'fer-Vaganyan?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Vgahinaky: So you all organized tl;le a!isassination'of Kirov?

"

Zinoviev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So you all asS111Ssinated Comrade Kirov?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Sit down.
In connection with Mrachkovsky':1 testimony, the accused 'rerVaganyan is examined. He admits that negotiatfoIIS for the
formation of· a united Trotskyi.te-Zinovievite terrorist· blo-c ·were
started as far back as June 1932 and that in the first stages e>f &~
negotiations he,. Ter-Vaganyan, had sen•ed as interhlediary·netween Lominadze llllld Kamenev, and between Smimov and Zinov~
iev.
· I. N. ~mimov denies Mracbkovsky's testimony to 1he eft' ect ttiat
he, Smimov, had conveyed Trotsky's instructions about terrorism
to the.Moscow 'frotskyite centre.
11yshinsky: I ask leave to read Vol XXIX, p. 115. of the record
<Jf the examination of Smirnov on August 13 by Scheiriin, Examining Magistrate for cases of special importance, according to which
Smimov said that in 1931 Sedov gave terroristic directions. Here
is Smirnov's teslimony: "On my return to Moscow I reported this
to Safonova and Mrachkovsky."
·
Vyshinsky: Well, now, does this correspond to what you: said
five minutes ago'!
Smirnov: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: I ask that permission be given io Sminu5v b.imse!f
to read this passage from the evidence. As Smimov.persists in his
denials, tries to evade responsibility, I ask that he read
pa_!sage from the evidence in front of everybody present here.
Smirnov (reading his testimony): "Iii 1931 Sedov gave. terroristic directions which, on my return to Moscow, I reported to Safonova and Mrachkovsky."
Vyshinsky (to Mrachkovsky): Mrachkovsky, did you learn
about SedC>v's line on teNorism from Smirnov?'
I Mrachkovsky: Yes.
Vys-himky: After Smimov's return from Berlin did·ym!"meet

this

him?

Mrachkovsky: Yes.
Vyshinsku: Ddd you speaktohfm?
Mrachkovsky: Yes.

kovs)ty e~sizes.. ttiat he, .¥r~hkovsky, ~- everything with
the knowledge _of Smimov ~d that S0ur1wv knew the people whom
_J;ie; Mrachkovsky, .was preparing .to commit terroristic acts.
.QiieStionEid ·1by .Comrade Vy.s.hinsky whether he confirms
Mracbkov:sky~s testimony, .Smirnov asserts that Mrachkovsky's
statements ~illot:conform with the.facts,
Vyshinsky: You were a member of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
.¢entre. That you admit. Here Mrachkovsky is no~ sinning against
the _truth. That is the first point. Secondly, the cen:tre was organized
~Ii the, basis of terrorism against the leaders of the Par:ty and the
govemJD.ent. Is that right?.
Smirnou: That is right.
Vyshinsky: Did. you receive from Trotsky instructions on ter.:
rorism as a means of struggle? ·
Smirnov: Yes.
Mrachkovsky then goes on to tell the Court about. the activities
of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist cenh-e. ;I'he members of this
centre wer.e Zinoviev" Kamenev,. Lominadze, Mraohkovsky, Ter7
·
Vagaµyan and others.
Comrlll!ie Vyshinsky 1lhen asks. Zinoviev:
Vushinskg: .When· w.as the lllllited centre organized?
Zinovieu: In the summer of 1932.
V11shinskg: During what period of Ume did it function?
Zinoviev: Actually-up to 1936.
Vyshin1ky: What were its activities?
Zinoviev: Its main activities consisted in making preparations
tor terroristic acb.
Vgshinsky: Against whom?
: :x::
Zinoviev: Against the leaders.
Vyshinsky: That is, against Comrades Stalin, Voroshilov, and
K&ganovich? Was it your centre that organized the assassination
of Comrade Kirov? \Vas the assassination of Sergei Mironovicli
Kirov organized by your centre, or by some other organization?
Zinoviev: Yes, by our centre.
V11shinaku: In that centre there were you, Kamenev, Smirnov.
Mrachkovsky and Ter-Vaganyan?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Vf1shinakfl: So you all organized tbe asuination·of Kirov?

"

Zinovieu: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So you all assassinated Comrade Kirov?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Sit down.
In connection with· Mrachkovsky's testimony, the accused TerVaganyan is examined. . He admits fhat ·negotiafuns for the
formation of· a united Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist· blo-c ·were
started as far back as June 1932 and that in the first stages Gf ;fh.e
negotiations he111 Ter-Vaganyan, had served as interinediacy between Lominadze and·Kam.enev, and between Smimov and· Zinov~
iev.
· I. N. ~mirnov denies Mrachkovsky's testimony to ·the effect ttiat
he, Smirnov, had conveyed Trotsky's instructions about terrorism
to the· Moscow Trotskyite centre.
"liyshinsky: I ask leave to read Vc>L XXIX, p. 115, of the record
of the ex.amination of Smirnov on August 13 by Scheiriin, Exainining Magistrate for cases of special importance, according to which
Smirnov said that in 1931 Sedov gave terroristic directions. Here
is Smirnov's testimony: "On my return to Moscow I reported tbis
to Safonova and Mracbkovsky."
·
Vyshinsky: Well, now, does this correspond to what you Said
five minutes ago'!
Smirnov: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: I ask that permission be given ~o Smirn.dv himself
to read this passage from the evidence. As Smirnov.persists in his
denials, tries to evade responsibility, I ask that he read
pa~·
sage from the evidence in front of everybody present here.
Smirnov (reading his testimony) : "In 1931 Sedov gave. terroristic directions which, on my return to Moscow, I reported to Safonova and Mrachkovsky."
Vyshinsky- (to Mraehkovsky): Mrachkovsky, did you learn
about SEidov's line on terirorism from Smimov?'
Mrachkovsky: Yes.
Vyshinsky: After Smirnov's relurn from Berlin did' you· meet

this

him?
Mrachkovsky: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Ddd you speak to- hhn?
Mrachkouskg: Yes.

Vyshinsky: Together'wit.h Safonova?
Mrachkovsky: Yes.
Vyshirisky: And you knew about these direction$ of Sedov's?
Mrachkovsky: Yes, I so aITirm..
Vyshinsky: .Smimov, idid ·you hear that?
Smirnov: (Remains sileni.}
In reply to the questions of Comrade Ulrich, Presid.en:: cf fue
Court, Smirnov admits that he also communicated Tro~ky's i!lstrUctions to Ter-Vaganyan. In. reply to Comrade.,. Vyshillsky, fue
accused Kamenev once 11gain states mat "the instru.ctions Smfi'nov had personally reoeiv·ed from Trotsky-the directions on
terrorism~had been passoo o~ as given by SniJ.rnmr ii;i.nd. &at
they were of decisive imporitance to tihe organization."
At the end of MrachkovskY'.$ ,e~2m.ix:o.ati.QD Vyshinsky ;;-,sks
Bakayev in wibat part . Cl'f 1934 he went ta Leningrad.
Bakayev: In the autumn.
Vyshinsky: For what pt-irpooe?
Bakayev: .To ascertain the preparedness of t..he organiza.tion
to assassinate Kirov.
Vyshinsky (to Kamenev): Did you give the instruct.kms te
make preparaitions ~or the assassination of Kirov?
Kamenev: Yes, in lib.e autu..mn.
Vyshinsky: In the au1~•mn J"C'U a_'1id Evdokli.mov instn1crecl
Bakayev to go to Leningra<l to check up on the progress which was
being made by the Lemn,,,"'!aid Tl."'.>tskyite-Zinovievite group in.
!ts preparations to ~bi.ate E:irov? Is that right; do you confam
.. .
that?

Kamenev: Yes, that .fa true. i co:ufum that.
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED EVDOElMOV
Questioned by Comrade Ulrich, Presideni of the Couri, w©.efu.,.
... ~ he confirms the tesl:fuil.ou:;y he gave .at the prel.imh:i.ll!"y. e~­
eminaffo..:i, Evdokimov l."oollies in the· atffimative. Af.t~ 'i!'.iE'.~
":vc 'lkhnov am1wers ·a m::~ei: of quesl:ions put to him by Com·

rade V71himky•
. Vy1hlniq: You w£~.ffi -~if.cf. ~e ~E:.iil'0't.
Bodoldmorl: 'Yes, I woo.

Vyshinsky: Did you know that the centre was prepariog
assassinations of ·the leaders of the C.P.S.U. and 1!he Soviet Govermnent?
Eudokimou: Yes.
Vys_hinsky: Did yuu personally approve <>f the preparation:
of these assassinations?
.Evdokimov: I agreed to them.
Vyshinsky: You took part in and c005idered it necessary
to proceed by the path of assassination?
Eudokimou: Yes.
Vyshiqsku: Do you admit lliat fue assassination of ComradeKirov was prepared with your assistance?
Bvdokimov: Yes, I admit that.
Vyshinsky: At ~he triall in Leningrad, on .January 15-16, 1935,
whed facing the oou.ri as you do now, you emphatically asserted
that you had nothing to db wHlh that murdler. At that time
you told untruths?
Eud°okimov: Yes, I deceived the Court.
Vyshinsky: You thought you deceived the- Court. As a matter Olf fact 1!he deception did nQt work. Now it :is exposed.
Evdokimov: Yes.
After that Evdokimov relates to the Court in detail th2t the·
assassination of S. M. Kirov was committed on the direct instructions of the terrorist centre of ~he Troukyite-Zinovievite organization. The !instructions about terrorism rame from Trotsky. "Smirnov and I," says Evdokimov, "discussed this question several times.
In the summer of 1932, a conference was held in the railway
car of Mrachkovsky who had jµst arrived in Moscow. I, Mrachkovsky, Smirnov and Ter-Vaganyan were present at this conference.
We talked of terrorism, Smirnov, particularly, was in favour of
terrorism."
Smimov makes the attempt to deny thislestimony of Evdokimov.
However, the rfplies of Mrachkovsky and Evdokimov to questions put to them by Comrade Vyshinsky establish that the
co.n'Versation about terrorism did take place and that Smirno\·
fully and completely supported the line of terroristic acts,
Soon after this conversation In Mrachkovsky's car, says Ev47

dolcimov, continuing Ms teStimony, a conferen.ce took place
in the. summer villa at Ilyinskoye, where Kamenev and Zinoviev
lived at that time. At this conference, at which Ka.rev, Zinoviev,
Kamenev, Evdokimov and Bakayev were present, it was decided
to form, a Moscoiw centre iand a; Leningrad centre for the
purpose of combining the terrorist groups. And this decision
was- subsequently put into effect. At this same conference al
Ilyinskoye in 1932, !there was outright talk about the necessity of terrorism, ·in 1he first place against Stalin and Kirov.
The organization olf these terroristic actS was,- on Zinoviev's proposal, entrusted to Bakayev.
Vyshinsky: Accused Bakayev, do you confirm this?
Bakayev: During that COillferen.ce Zinoviev said that the Trotskyites, Oil Trotsky's projiosal, had set .to work to organize the
assassination of Stalin and that wi! ~hould take the initiative in this
matter into our own hands.
Vyshinsky: Zinoviev said that?
Bakayev: Yes.
Vyshinsky. Zinovfov· said that you should take the• initiative?
Bakayev: At that conference I was instructed ro organize a:
terroristk aet against Stalin.
Vg1hinsky: And you undertook to dlo that, did you?
Bakagev: Yes.
Continuing, Evdokimov states with reference .to the fac~
concerning the preparations for the assassination of S. M. Kirov;
ibat fu the summer of 1934 a conference was held in Xamenev's
apartment in Moscow at whkh Kam.enev, Zinoviev, Evdoki:mov,
SokOlndkov, Ter-Vaganyan, Reingold and Bakayev were pr<:!Sent.
At this oomerence it was decided to expedite the assassination of
S.' M. Kirov.
Vysl1inskg: So it was pu.i as straight as that: "To expedite
the· a5sassinafJ!Qn of S. ~ Kirov"?
Evdokimov: Yea, it was .put like that.
COntinuing, Evdokimov s·ays that for this purpose Bakayev,
in the autumn ol.' 1934, went to Leningrad fo check up on the
progress ot pteymrations for the terroristic aet against Sergei
Mironovkh Kirov by the teningrad terrorl8ts. These terrorist
~s

groups began to shadow Sergei Mironovich ·Kirov and waited
for an opportune moment to commit their terroristic act.
Vyshinsky: Was the murder of Sergei Mironovich Kirov pre·
pared by the centre?
Evdokimov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You ipersonalily took part in these preparations?
Evdokimov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did Zinoviev and Kamenev participate with you
in the prepa-rations?
Evdokimov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: On the instructions of the centre, Bakayev went
to Leningrad to check µp on the progress made in the preparations,
did he not?
Evdokimov: Yes.
As a result of furl!her questioning Com.mere Vyshiinsky es·
tablishes that while on his visit to Leningrad, Bakayev met
the future murderer of S. M. Kirov, Nikolayev, with whom he
discussed the preparations for the assassination.
Vyshinsky (to Bakayev): Did you meet Nikolayev in Lenin·
grad?
Bakayev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you confer about an understanding regarding
the assassination of S. M. Kirov?
Bakayev: There was no need for me to come to an understanding with him about it because the instructions for the
assassination had been given by Zinoviev and Kamenev.
Vyshinsky: But Nikolayev to1d you that he .had decided to
assassinate S. M. Kirov, didn't he?
Bakayev: He did, and so did other terrorists-Levin, Mandelstamm, Kotolynov, Rumyantsev.
Vyshin_sky: You discussed the assassination of Kirov?
Bakayev: .Yes.
I Vyshinsky: He expressed his determination, And, what was
your attitude towards it?
Bakayev: I was for it.
In reply to further questions put by Comrade Vyshlnsky to
Bakayev it is ascertained that aiter his visit to L!µlingrad,
.Bakayev reported to Evd<>kim.ov and .Kamenev on the progreu

"

bf the preparations tot the &Ssassination of S. M. Kirov. Asked by
Cotmade Vyshinsk.y whether Bakayev had actually reported to
him, Kamenev· answered in the· affirmative.
Vyshinsky (to Kamenev): What did he report to you?
Kamenev: He said that llhe organization was prepared to
strike a blo1!f and that ·the blow would be struck.
Vyshinsky: And what was ·your attitude towards this?
_Kamenev: The blow was -planned aiJd prepared on the order of the centre of which I was a member, and I ll'egarded
it as llhe fUll'filment of the task we had set ourselves.

*

*

*

'I1liS concludes the morning ·session.

AUGUST 19 (EVENING ~ESSION)
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED DREITZER
The first to be examined at the evening session of August .19
is the accused Dreitzer. Dreitzer was one of the most prom•
ineM: Trotskyites. He had been chief of Trotsky's bodyguard. T~
gether with Trotsky, he had organized the counter-revolutionary
demonstration on November 7, 1927. When Trotsky was in exile
in Alma-At.a, Dreitzer organized the communications between
Trotsky and the Moscow Trotskyite cenitre.
The accused Dreitzer.states that the Trotskyite-Zinovievite underground organization was a strictly centralized and disciplined
counter-revolutionary organization. Dreitzer categorically and
emphatically denies that there could be any possibility of halC·
heartedness in the ·attitude of any one of the members of the Trotskyite-ZinOVIevi~e counter-revolutionary bloc towards terroris~
activity.
"There oould be no acting on <>ne's own, no orchestra witho-qt
a .conductor among us,"· stated Dceitzer. "I am surprised at the
assertions of Smirnov, who, according to his words, both knew
and µid not know, spoke and-did OOt speak, acted :ind did not act;
This is not true!" '
Relating his terroristic activities in detail Dreitzer says that the
Trotskyite section of the counter-revolutionary bloc ihad received
instructions to resort to terrorism against the leaders of the Party
and.the government from abroad, from L. D. Trotsky, and here
from I. N. Smirnov, Trotsky's deputy in the U.S.S.R.
In the autwnn of 1931, Dreitzer took advantage of an official
,business trip to Berlin to establish contact with Trotsky at U1e instructions from I. N. Smirnov.
Smii:nov's definite instructions- were to ascertain Trotsky's atti·
it

tude on the question of a bloc between the Trotskyites and the
Zinovievites. In Berlin he twioe met Sedov (Trotsky's son), in a
cafe in Leipziger Strasse. Sedov then told him that Trotsky's mstrnction would be sent Oill later.
In October 1934 Dreitzer's sister brought >him from Warsaw
a Gennan dnema magazine which an agent of Sedov's had given
her for Dreitzer. In the magazine Dreitzer had no difficulty in
discovering-as this forll! of communication had been agreed upon
with.Sedov in Berlin-a message written in invisible ink in Trotsky's own handwriting containing instructions to prepare and to
carry out immed!ately terroristic acts against Stalin and Voroshllov. Dreitzer at once passed the letter on to Mrachkovsky who,
after r~ading ~t, burnt it for reasons of secrecy.
As far baok. as September-Octob~r 1931 I. :N. Smirnov had
spoken to Dreitzer in the U.S.S.R. about ithe necessity to follow
the lin~ of >terroristic methods of struggle. In the autumn of 1932,
Dreitzer received from I. N. Smirnov, in the :latter's apartment, direct instructfons to organize .terroristic · acts against Stalin and
Voroshilov. Smirnov, referring to the line taken by Trotsky, there
and then instructed Dreitzer to establish contact with Mrachkovsky
fo~ the purpose of making practical preparations for and oarrying
out terroristic acts. "My next meeting with Ivan Nikitich Smirnov,"
said Dreitzer, "took place in 1932. This was in the autumn. At that
meeting he informed me that the question of a bloc had been settled, that the bloc had already been formed, and had been formed
on the basis of Trotsky's terroristic line."
In the spri11g of 1933 Mrachkovsky repeated to Dreitzcr.:~
instructioIIJS of the Trotskyite-Zinoviev.lte centre to expedite the
ads of terror against the leaders of tlle C.P.S.U. and the Soviet
Government. Moreover, on leaving Moscow, 1Mrachkovsky put at
Dreitzer's disposal a number of terrorists he had trained. In addition to Smirnov and Mrachkovsky, Dreitzer was very closely
co~nected with Heingold and Pickel, together with whom he belonged to the Moscow terrorist centre of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
. bloc.
Carrying out the instructions of L. D. Trotsky and the Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist centre, conveyed to him by Smirnov and
Mrachkovsky, Dreitzer organized two terrorist groups: Gaye\rsk:_~·~.
52

group, which was instructed to commit a terroristic act against
Comrade Stalin, and Esterman's group, which was instructed to>
kill Comrade Voro:shilov.
Jn connection with Dreitzer's evidence tii'e State Prosecutor
questions Mrachkovsky and I. N. Smirnov.
Mrachkovsky fully confirms Dreitzer's testimony.
Smirnov asserts that he actually did receive in his apartment
Dreitzer as an active Trotskyite; however, he allegedly discussed
with him, not terrorism but "the general situation in the country."
Mrachkovsky and Dreitzer in reply to this declare: "Smirnov
is lying!"
Upon the conclusion of Dreitzer's examination Comrade Vyshinsky puts several questions to the accused Zinoviev.
Vyshinsky: Accused Zinoviev, in the summer .of 1932 had you
already come to :an understanding about the necessity of organizing terroristic acts, or was .there only talk abO'Ut these terroristic
acts?
Zinoviev: As far as I can picture it, -the situation was as follows:
\Vith the Trotskyites this was already a mature decision,
based on
;!;.
the absolutely precise instructions of Trotsky given a: fairly long
time before that, and they had taken a number of practical steps.
Vyshinsky: What was the attitude of the Tro!skyite part of
your bloc on the question pf terrorism?
Zinoviev:' In our negotiations on the formation of a united centre this .question played a decisive part. By that time the so-called
Zinovievite part of the bloc was fully ripe for such decisions.
Vyshinsky: Dild Smirnov di.splay any activity in relation to
this, or not?
Zinoviev: Smirnov, in my opin1on, displayed more activity than
any one else, and we regarded ··him as the undisputed head of the
Trot.;k.yite part of the bloc, as the man best informed about Trot·
sky's views, and fully sharing these views.
Vy1hinsky: Did you personally hear a number of proposals
Crom Smirnov?
Zinoviev: I personally conducted negotiation!! :with him two or
three times.

Vyshinsky: Did Srnirnov display persistence during these negotiations, did he press for terroristic acts?
Zinoviev: As I have already said, he heatedly and with much
persuasion insisted on the commission of terroristic acts, although
there was no need to persuade us. We were already convinced.
Vyshinsky: I ask the court to note that !he testimony of Zinoviev, Rein.gold and Dreitzer establishes that after 1932 practical
preparations were made for terroris-tic acts, and that Dreitzer carried these on on the direct instructions of Smirnov; and that
Smirnov persistently urged Zinoviev to pass on to terroristic activities. I ask you to take note of this as a conclusion to be drawn
from the investigation which we have carried on so far.
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED REINGOLD
I. I. Reingold confirms that he was one of the most active
members of the Zinovievite under.ground counter-revolutionary
organization, was all the time in direct contact with G. E. Zinoviev
and L.B. Kamenev, took part in all the secret conferences of the
Zinovievitq·and l!'l one time was invited by Zinoviev and Kamenev
to take parfin drawing up the platform of the counter-revolulion.ary' .organization . they were heading, was a member of the
Moscow Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre, organizer_ of terroristic
groups and personally directed one of the groups which was preparing to assassinate Cc;>mrade Stalin.
Reingold says: "I wa:~·connected organizationally and personally with a number of mem~rs of the Trotskyite-Ziinovievite cenh:e:_
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Sokolnikov and others. With some of these
I was connected long before 1926. In particular I have been acquainted with Kamenev since 1923 and with Sokolnikov since
1919. As for the Trotskyite part of this centre, Dreitzer was my
personal friend; I was in very close touch with Mmchkovsky at
my official job, as Mrachkovsky worked under me at the head offices of the Central Cotton Committee. I also knew I. N. Smirnov
verry well. I was in close contact also with Zinoviev." Continuing,
Reingold says: "I can confirm that Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bakayev,
Evdokimov, Smirnov, Mrachkovsky, Ter-Vaganyan and Sokolni~

kov were members of .the Trotskyite-Zinoviev.ite centre. Negotia"
tions ·were carried on about joint activity with the ''Leftists': Shatskin, Lominadze and Sten, and also with the repres_entatives of
the Right deviation: Rykov, Bukharin and Tomsky." "The idea of
the Zinovievites uniting with the Trotskyites," says Reingold,
"arose as far back as 1931. Meeting Zinoviev in his apartment and
in his villa that year, I heard him say that it was a· pity that we
had fallen out with Trotsky." Continuing bis testimony, Reingold
states that dn discussing the general political situation, Zinoviev
emphasized that the economic position of the Soviet Union had
become stron,ger and that it was absolutely .no use talking about
collapse. It was necessary to unite all lhe forces oppo.."€'0. to the
present leadership. That is how the way was paved for a bloc
with the Trotskyites. The basis for the union of the Trotskyites with
the Zinovievites, emphasizes Reingold, was terrorism.
Vyshinsky: How did Zinoviev and Kamenev recoaci!e terror•
istic activities with Marxism?
·
Reiizgold: In 1932, Zinoviev, at Kamenev's apartment, ~·the
presence of a number of members of the united, Trotskyite-7.iiilMievite centre argued in favor of resorting to terror as follGw:
although terror is incompatible with Marxism, at the present D\ement these considerations must be abandoned. There are no
other methods available of fighting the leaders of the Party and
the Government at the present time. Stalin combines in himself all
the suength and firmness of the present Party leade...Ship; -There.
fore Stalin must be put out of the way in the fust place. ~enev
enlarged on this theory and said that the former methodS at ftghlfug, namely, attempts to win the masses, combinations wit1i the
leaders of the Rightists, and banking on economic diffico:lties, have
failed. That is why the only method of strugge av&Jmble iB tel'!
roristic acts agatinst Stalin and his closest comrades-in-anns,'KiroV,
Voroshilov; Kaganovich, Orjonikidze, Postyshev, Kossior and· till:
others.
"For this purpose," continued Reingold, "it was deelded . to
create an organization of the most ~y eh~ ad ~·
peopie who could go ~ht through with the job. Simulie~
negotiations were conied en .with aha leaden of the·~
,65

Bukharin and T<>Disky. After these negotiations ·zinovievdefinitely
said that he had found common political ground with Tomsky in'
appraising ·the policy (}four country. These conversations con~
tlniJ.ed iii 1932.·and were caITi.ed on between Kamenev, Tomsky and
'Rykov. · Communication with Bukharin was maintained through
Karev, an active ZinovievHe who was closely connected with the
tWoterroristie groups of Slepkov and Eismont."
Reingold then proceeds to relate his own counter-revolution·
ary activity which consisted fui organizing terrorist growps to
Q$Sassinate Comradles StaHn and.other leaders of the Party and :the
Government. He enumerates a nurriber of such groups which were
directed by Bakayev.
C'ontinuing, Reingold says: "There was .an interruption in our
terroristic activities between the autumn of 1932 and the summer
of 1933 caused by the fact that Zinoviev and Kamenev were comP,romised in connection with the Ryutin case. In connection with
that, in the beginning of 1933, at one of the conferences held in the
apartment of Bogdan, Zinoviev's former private secretary, EvdoJcim~ passed on the instruction in the name of the united centre
to suspend terroristic work until Zinoviev and Kamenev had ret~ed from exile, until they had declared their repentance, were
reinstated in the Patty and had gained a certain amount of con6deoce."
Vyshinsky: Did Evdokimov say that?
Reingold: Evdokimov spoke arb~ut that.
Vyshinsku-: Did EVtlokimov know that Zinoviev and Kamenev
wee to declare their repentance?
Reingold: He did. He knew that this was in the nature of the
Zinovievite organization, which in the pastAiad had no little ex·
perience in this sort of repentance.
Reingold goes on to tell the Court about the duplicity which
ZinovleV a'llld Kamenev h&<l elevated to a system. Zinoviev arid Kamenev, he says, insisted upon every advantage being taken of legal
p0uibilities for the purpose of "crawling on the belly into the
Pa-ty"--this wal! Zinoviev's favourite-expres~ion--and of winning
the eonfidenee of the Party, particularly of Stalin. After this
Mlence had been re5tored, strictly secflClt terroristic wo;k was to be

eon-

f)ll

carried on parallel with open work. The combination of these two
methods represented the means wihich, as Zinoviev and Kamenev
calculated, could bring them to power. In the event of a success
of the terroristic plans, continues Reingold, Zinoviev and Kamenev, having been reinstated lin the Party under Stalin, having been
forgiven by him, thought they could return to power in the "natural" way.
Vg.~hinsky: I understand then from what you say that both
Kamenev and Zinoviev proceeded along two lines: on the one
hand they did all they possibly could to display their loyalty, their
devotion to the .Party, while on the other hand it was they wftlo
were preparing .terrorist acts against the leaders of the 'Party. ls
that right?
Reingold: Y~.
Vgshinskg: Accused Zinoviev, Reingold's testimony implicates
you in a grave crime. Do you admit your guilt?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Vgshinsky: Accused Kamenev, I put the same question to you.
Kamenev: I answer in t:he affirmnt!ve.
Comrade Vyshinsky reminds Kamenev that he admitted this
only after Reingold had given his evidence; that at the preliminary
iiivestigation he did not admit this until he had been implicated by
others.
'Vyshinsky: So you confirm that you had such a monstrous
plan?
Kamenev: Yes, there was such a monstrous plan.
Vgshinsky: You worked·out this monstrous plan and confim1
this now?
Kam:enev:· Yes, I do.
As a result Qf the further questioning of Reingold it is
a5certained that. Ka~nev and Zinoviev commissioned Reingold
to carry ciut a number of responsible tasks, in particular, that of
r·creating ahroad a spedal fund for the purpose of financing the
terrorist organization in the event of Kamenev and Zinoviev bdng
deported abroad.
Vyshinsky: Accused Kamenev, was there any such talk?
Kamenev: This was in 1929 when I and Zinoviev presumed_

&7

tiiai we might he deported abroad like Trotsky and therefore we
thought it necessary to create abroad some fund for the purpose of
maintaining and mntinuing the wm:k which we had been carrying
<!IO· here.
Vy11hinsky: From what resources did you think you could
i&et up. this fond?
Kamenev: \Ve had certain resources in view.
Vyshinsky: Did you appeal to Reingoid for assistance?
.Kamenev: Not for assistance. We simply insiructed Reingold
~ Arkus to crea<te this fund. Reingolo and Arkus were financial
officials under Sokolnikov.
Vyshinsky: Did you propose to organize this fund at the
expense of the state?
Kamenev: At any rate not out. of Reingol<l's·personal funds.
Vyshinsky: To put it more exactly, you intended to i;ob. th-.!
state.
Asked by Comrade Vyshlnsky how ihe Trotskyite-Zinovievite
centre had intended ro C<Jver up the traces of terroristic crimes,
the accused Reingold states that in the event of their coming
to power, t.lie Trotskyite-Zinovkvite centre in!:endedl to kill off
all the officials of the G.P.U. who as tlhey supposed might
have in their hands threads ()If the "terroristic oons-piracy
!lgainst the state," and that alh thefr own adherents who were
dir~ct!y and immediateiy invmved ~n terrorism .were likewise to
he killed off.
Reingold: states: "Zinoviev and ·Kamenev were both of the
c>pinion, and they told me about tlhds, tihat on -the morrow of
·the coup .d'etat, after the seizure of power, Bakayev should b~
-put at the head of the G.P.U. in the capacity of chairman of the
G.P.U. By the use of the G.P.U. maohinery, he was to assist
in cc•1ering up the traces, in do,i:ng away with, in killing, not
only 1lhe employees of the People's Commissariat for Internal
Mairs-the G.P.U., who might he in possession of any threads
of ~e conspiTa:ey, but dso a1l the .oireet perpetrators of terJrorlsii<e sets against Stalin and his immediat~ assistants. By the
haoo @i Blikay-~v the Trotskyite-Zinovi.;vite organization ·was
io del>tl'oy its own acH'!ists, Us own terrorist gunmen, who· were
n>.atter.''
i!m'J'h>ed m ·
08

w..

It was also proposed, Reingold continues. to testify, that aft~

Ute seizure of power, Trotsky was to be recalled from abroad aud
with his support all those who wer.e most devoted to Stalin ~eteto he
removed from Party and Soviet pos1s. Thus it·was.proposed>W
~ze all power in the OOUlltry.
Reingold's statemen~. and also .the replies . to questi<>M put
to Bakayev and Zinoviev by. Comrade Vy.Shinsky:;.. rev-ea1. Bakayev in the. role .of organizer of terrorist groups for :whieh
particularly "reliable" persons had been· recroiled·..
Among those. ·~J:cliable'-'. persons who.- were.: named were1Btig~
dan, Zinoviev's former seqetary; Radin and .Faivilovi~h, ;active
Zinovievites, and Rumyantsey and·Koto~v. the terrorists,- who
were executed in co~n, with the murdet:.()f ;Kirov.
\rgshinsky {to Bakayev): Did Bogdan: ~ve · any -instntctions?
·
.
/µJkayev: Yes.
Vgsliinsky: From whom?
Bakayei•: From Zinoviev.·.()n zµi~ie"'.s in11~ructiorur Bogdan
was to shoot Stalin in the Secr.etariat o.f the c,ntral ·Cop;imiUee.
Vyshinskg: Accused.. 2;in~.viev, have you h~rd: .IJ~ayev'l! te$r
tmtony?
Zinoviev: It is ..tnte that. l:~dvised Bakaye~ ;b~ ,eJJ.list. BQgdan
for: terrorist attenipts, and that one of. th~. to be· .~ted
PY. him was Stalin~
.
.
In this connection Bakayeli' testifies: ~'The day after: I bad
been instnicted to organize the assassination Zinovie~ a11ked me to
come and see him. ·In his apartment I .met Reingold and::BGfrdan. After greeting me Z~viev -said:. 'Here. is: a .gunmaa· fOr
your group; then Reingold recommends jl!}so Fa~vilovicll whom:I
too know as being all right.' "
Vyshinsky: What does it mean "being .all right;"
Bako.yev: An absolutely reliable per~
Vyshinsky: ·F(>r COIQ.mitting ·terroristic: acts?
Bakayev: Yes-.
EXAMINATION OF TH'£ ACCUSED .'BAKAYEv

Following Reingold, e~nce: is, given. by... ~llJ~••J.PrMlr
to questioD.l! put to-him by.~~lllfai:Je \"Y~J 119 lelltilell:dcre
.

·~

the Court how the preparations for these tenoristic acts were
carried on. Partioularly intense terroristk adivity was carried
on in August 1932 and in the autumn of 1934. Bakayev mentions
the names of those who took part in the preparation of terroristic
acts. These were Reingold, Pic.kel, Faivilovich, Radin, and others.
Bakayev testifies before the Court how the .terrorists of the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre tried to destroy ali clues and preserve
secrecy. In the autumn of 1932 Zinoviev and Kamenev were expelled from the Party. The question then arose: What to do next?
Then Bakayev met Zinoviev, Evdoki.mov, Ku:klin, Sharov, Dreitzcr and others and it was resolved to suspend terroristic activities for
a time. In the autumn of'1934 fuey were resumed.
Bakayev testifies that in October 1934 an attempt on the life
of Stalin was organized in Moscow under the direction of Kamenev,
Evdokimov and himsel[, in which he, Bakayev, took a direct part.
The attempt failed. When the attempt failed Bakayev went to
Kamenev and told him about it.
Continuing his testimony, Bakayev says: "Kamenev said: 'A
pity, let's !hope that next time we'll be more successful.' Then
turning to Evdokimov he asked how things were in Leningrad.
Evdokimov replied that it would he advisable to check up on the
situation in Leningrad and that Bakayev should be sent to Leningrad. KanieneV agreed-yes, he said, Bakayev absoklrely must go.
I agreed to go. Before my departure I asked Evdokimov whom
I was to Teport to there and with whom I was to talk. Evdokimov
replied that I was to report. to Levin. I said that I did not know
Levin's address as I had not. seen him for many years. Evdokimov promised to &l'i'allge for Levin or Mandelstamm to meet me_
at the station. I went and was actually met at theS'tatcolt by Levin
who said: 'So Gregory Evseyevich (Zinovtevj <foe51H trtf~ ei~her
Gert!k, Kuklin or even Evdokimov, but sends people here to ch~k
up on our mood and our work. Well, we're not a proud lot':.: I
asked him to caU the boys together. Shortly after, in addition to
Levin and Mandelstamm., Sossitsky, Vladimir Rumyantsev, Kotolynov and Myasnik~v gathered htg4rtber in Levin's apartment. Koto.
lynov said that he had establish~d a regulSJT watch over Kirov and
that Kirov was so well ccwered that there would be no difficulty in
kmtng him. I asked to be introduced to one or those who had been
80

assigned to commit terroristic acts. Levin asked Kotolynov·t<> invite
Leonid Nikolayev. I knew that Leonid Nikolayev was a member
of the Leningrad organization. Levin said that Nikolayev was an
old me'miber of the Young Communist League whom Evdokimov
had known for ma.ny years and whom he had given the best recommendation as an absolutely reliable person. Nikolayev gave
me the impres.sion of being a determined and convinced terrorist.
He told me that he had succeeded in finding out the exact time
when Kirov travelled from. hiS apartment to the Smolny, that he
could kill ,Kirov either near the Sinolny or in the Smolny itself and
that he had tried to get an appointment ·with Kirov so as to shoot
him but had ifailed to gel rut -appointment. Nikolayev further reported that be, together with two other terrorists, were keeping a
watch on Kirov."
In his testimony Bakayev says that of all the activities of the
terrorist centre he was only aware of the decision to assassinate
Stalin and Kirov, and that he only learned of preparati~ having
been made for other terroristic acts when he read the indictment.
Vyshinsky: Bakayev, is it correct that you were a member of
the terrorist centre?
Bakauev• Yes, it is.
Vyshinsky: In 1932 you received instructions to organb:e the
assassination of Comrade Sralin. Was that so?
Bakayev: Yes.
Vushinsku: Did you take a number of practical nieasurek to
carry out these instructions, namely, to organize several attempts
on the life of Com,rade Stalin, which failed through n0 fault of
yours?
Bakayev: That is so.
Vyshinsky: Besides, did you take part in the assassination of
Comrade Kirov?
Bakaue'V: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Besides, c).id you go to Leningrad on the instructions of the terrorist centre. to check up on the preparations that
were 'being made for this assassination? .
Bakauev: Yes.
·vyshinsky: On your return f'rotn. Leningrad, you reported that
everything was in ol'der, that the preparations for the murder were

tn

proceeding successfully. While you were in Leningrad "clid you
meet Kvlolynov; Rumyantsev and otl1ers?
Bakayev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In addition, did you meet Nikolayev, give him
instruetionS arouf the assassination ·and convince yourself that
Nik<>layev was a man of determination and could carry out the
instructions given?
Bakayev: Yes.
·Questioned. flirther, :however, Bakayev tried to minimize the
part lhe had played considering thail: he was merely a "co-organizer" of the preparations· for the foul murder of Comrade S. 1\1.
Kirov.
Vyshinsky: You gave the signals, you checked up Olll the :time,
you checked up on all that was being done at your signal, you
perpetrated a deed--doesn't that mean being the organizer of the
crime?
B<ikayev: Yes,"that means being the organizer of the crime.
Vyshinsky: So we are correct in saying that you were the
organizer of the assasshiation of· Kirov?
Bakqyev: \Veil, yes, but I was not the only one.
Vyshinskg: You were not the only one, Evdokimov was with
you. Accused. Zinoviev, you· too were an organizer of the assassination of Comrade Kirov, weren't yoo?
Zinoviev: I think Bakayev is right when he says that the real
and principal culprits "of the foul murder of Kirov··were myself,
Trotsky and Kameilev who organized the.united terrorist centre.
Bak'ayev played an important; but not the decisive part in it~
Vyshinsky: The decisive part was played by you, Trotsky and
Kamenev. Accused Kamenev, do you associate·yourself with Zinoviev's statement that the prihcipal ·oi·ganizer's were you, Trotsky and Zinovie~-, and that Bakayev played the part of ·a prac0
tical organizer?
Kamen-ev: Yes.
EXAMINATION OF'TH"E ACCUSED PICKEL

The· Supreme· Co11rt then -pr11Ceeds· to examine the· accused
Pickel. Pickel ·was one·of zµioviev's- moSt trusted men and for

62

many years was iil charge of his secreta
an active member of the Moscow terrorist
all the principal decisions and terroristic 1
centre: ~n the autumn of 1932 Pickel joine
organization of which Bakayev was the -lea
part in the attempt on the life of Comrade ;
ates the testimony given by Reingold and B~
rectly guided the preparations for this atten
characterization of the prmcipal leaders of
including Zinoviev, who were' masters in t
the ambitions, on the particularities of each ·
rouse passion, to rouse hatred, to rouse 1
boiling point, this, according to Pickel, wa
the heads of the counter-revolutionary, Trc
rorist bloc, 'were masllers.
Pickel, supplementing Bakayev's testin
a'Qtumn of 1933 Bogdan made another
Comrade Stalin. In this connection Pickel
that prevailed in the terrorist centre, the mt
hesitate to resort to the most sordid methOI
of their criminal activUies.
Pickel admits that Bogdan's suicide '
decision of the ter;rorist centre. In this cril
part was played by Bakayev. Bakayev spei
Bogd'llln before the latter committed ,suici
either to make an attempt on Stalin's lif,
Bogdan took his own life and, as he hoo
note making it appear that he was the vicl
ing.
Pickel goes on to relate what prep:m
terroristic act against Comrade Stalin in 1!
was that he put Bakayev in touch with Radi
for the carrying out of his terroristic act.
Another .very characteristic touch, ill<
kyites and Zinovievites tried to wipe out
terrorist organization, was Pickel's adm
avert the discovery and break-up of the o
in 1934 to go to a remote place for a time
63

Union of Soviet Writers, he easily obtained a commission to
visit . . . Spitzbergen for creative work.
On his return from Spitzbergeil, however, Pickel resum,ed his
terroristie work. He admitted fhat soon af.ter his arrival he -met
Dreitzer who informed him .that preparations were being made for
atrempts on the lives of •Kaganovtich, Voroshilov and other leaders
of the Party and the Government.
This concludes the proceedings of the evening session of
August 19.

AUGUST 20 {MORNING SESSION)
EXAMINAHON OF THE ACCUSED KAMENEV

The morning session cl August 20 commences with the ex:amirration of the accused L. B. Kamenev.
Kamenev states: "The terrorist conspiracy was organized aad
guided by myself, Zinoviev .and Trotsky. I became cmwi.TJ.ced
that the policy of the Pa:rty, the policy of its leade:rship, had been
victorious in 'the only sense rin which the political victory in foe
land of socia!lism is possible, that .this policy was recognized by the
masses of the toilers. Our banking on the possibility of a split in
the Party also proved groundless. We counted on the Rightist
{(roup of Rykov, Bukharin and Tomsky. The removal of thas group
from the leadership and the fact that it had become discredited :in
the eyes of the toiling masses deprived us of this trump card as
well. It was no use counting on any kind of serious internal difficulties to secure the over.throw of the leadership which had w<lli<l.ed
the country thl-ough extremely difficult stages, through indusuialization and collecthniz·ation. Two paths :remru.ned: either honestly
and completely to put a stop to the struggle against the Party, or to
continue this struggle, but ~ithQIUt a...-iy hope of obtaining any
mass support whatsoever, without a political platform, wHhcmt .a
banner, that is to say, by means of .indiv~dual terror. "We chose
the second path. In this we were guided by our boundless hatred
of the lead·el"S of the Party and the country, and by a thirst for
power- with which we were once so closely associated and from
which we were cast aside by the course of historical development."
Replying to Comra<lie Vyshinsky, the accused R.amenev relates
to the Court h-0w the Zinovievites entered into a bioc with the
Trotskyiies for the purpose of organizing a terroristic struggle
against the Party and the Soviet state.
65

"We carried on negoliiations about the bloc wfth Smirnov,
Mrachkovsky and Ter-Vaganyan, not as with men who independently issued politioal instructions," says Kamenev. "'I1hey were
of value to us as men who precisely repeated the instructions of
Trotsky. Knowing SmirnOJv and Mrachkovsky as active Trotskyites, knowing ·that Sm:imov had been abroad and had established
contact with Trotsky there, we were absolutely sure that the
instructions concerning terrorism conveyed bySmirnov and Mrachkovsky, and supported by them, were the exact instructions of
Trotsky. It was on this basis, and because Trotsky's instructions on
terror coincided with our own inclinations, that we concluded
what is ·here ca'!led a 'bloc,' and what should be called a: narrow
terrorist conspiracy. This conspiracy took shape in 1932. as an
organizational union which had no platform at ·all, and which set
itself the aim of seizing power by disorganizin~ the government
by terroristic means, by ·eliminating aind assassinating Stalin, as the
leader of the Party and the couIJJlry, as well as bis nearest oomradesin-arms."
The accu.....00. Kamenev fully coll.firms the leading part played
by I. N. Smirnov in the Trotskyite part of the terrorist TrotskyiteZinovievite centre, and concerning Smirnov's deni·als he says: "It
is ridiculous wriggli.11g, which cmly creates a comical impression."
Kamenev then goes on to tell the Court about the practkal
activities of the counter-revolutionary terrorists. He says:
"In the summer of 1932 a meeting of our Zfoovlevite centre was
held in our villa in Ilyinskoye. I myself, Zin<Jviev, Evdokimov, Bakayev, Kuklin and Karev were present. At this meeting Zinovie,reported that the union with the Trotskyites, who had received.
Trotsky's personal instructions to commit terroristic acts, was an
accomplished fact. At this- very meeting Bakayev was instructed
to carry out a terroristic act in Moscow, and Karev in Leningrad.
The exile of myself and Zinoviev somewhat held up the execution
of our terroristic plans. When we returned to Moscow, we made no
changes whatever ilil the basis of our bloc. On the contrary, we
proceeded to press forward· the terroristic CQIIlspiracy. This pres.sing forward was caused by two circumstances: first, foe coHapse
of the policy of double-dealing pursued by Zinoviev, who was removed from the editorial board of the Bolshevik. This made us fear
66

that ilnformation about our connection with Trotsky might have
reached the Party leadership. Secondly, the Trotskyites energetically
insisted on expediting the terroristic activities, having received 'n·
structions to tills effect from Trotsky. Organizationally, this found
expression in the decision that was adopted to hasten the assassination of Stalin and the assassination of Kirov."
ContinuJing, the accused Kamenev testifies: "In June 1934 I my·
self went to Leningrad where I instructed the active Zinovievite
Yakovlev to prepare an attempt on the life of Kirov parallel with
the Nikolayev-Kotolynov group. In the beginning of November
1934 I learned from Bakayev's report all the details· of the preparations that were being made by the Nikolayev group to assassinate Kirov."
Vyshinsky: Was Kirov's a:ssassinlllliondirectly the work of your
haru:ls?
Kamenev: Yes.
Kamenev gives the following testimony on the composition of
the terrorist Trotskyite-Zinovievifo centre:
"The centre oif the conspiracy consisted of the following persons: myself, Zinoviev, Evdokimov, Bakayev and Kuklin, on behill of the Zinovievites; Smirnov, Mrachkovsky and Ter-Vaganyan
on behalf of the Trotskyites. Among the leaders of the oonspiracy
another person may be named who in pomt of fact was one of the
leaders, but who, in view of the special plans we made in regard t.o him, was' not drawn into the practical work. I refer to
SokO.lnikov.
Vyshinsky: Who was a member of the centre, but whose part
was kept a strict secret?
Kamenev: Yes.
Continuing, Kamenev says: "KnoW!ing that we might be discovered, we designated a small group to continue our terroristic
activities .. J"or this purpose we designated Sokolnikov. It seemed to
us that on the side of the Trotskyites this role could be successfully
f performed by Serebryakov and Radek. Asked about this, Mrachkovsky said: Yes, in our opinion Serebryakov and Radek could
act as substitutes if, contrary to our expectations, our leading
group should be discovered."
Kamenev goes on to say that the Zinovievites carried on nego67

tiations and established contact with other counter-revolutionary
groups as well.
"In 1932," he says, "I personally conducted negotiations with
the so-called 'Leftist' group of Lominadze and Shatsky. In thi-s
group I found enemies of the Party leadership quit:e prepared tc;>
resort to the m-0st determined measures of struggle against it. At
the same <time, I myselif and Zinoviev maintaliled constant contact
with the former 'Workers' Opposition' group of Shlyapnikov and
Medvedyev. In 1932, 1933 and 1934 I personally maintained relations with! Tomsky and Bukharm and sounded their political
sentiments. They sympathized with us. When I asked Tomsky
about Rykov's frame of mind, he replied: 'Rykov thinks the same as
I do.' In reply to my question as to what Bukharin thought, he
said: 'Bukharin thinks the same as I do, but is pursuing somewhat
different tactics: he does not agree with the line of the Party, but
is pursuing tactics of persistently enrooting himself in the Party
!3.nd winning the personal confidence of the leadership.'"
In examining the accused ~amenev the Court deals in detail
with the double-dealing to which the conspirators resorted in addition to terrorism in their fight against the Party.
Vgshinskg: What appraisal shOOld be given of the articles and
statements you wrore in 1933, in which you expressed loyalty to
the Party? Deception?
Kamenev: No, worse than decepti-On.
Vgshinskg: Perfidy?
Kamenev: Worse.
Vgshinskg: Worse than deception, worse than perfidy-find
the word. Treason?
Kamenev: You have found it.
Vgshinskg: Accused Zinoviev, do you confirm this?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Vyshinskg: Treason, perfidy, double-dealing?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Proceeding to explain the motives of his oonduot, the accused
Kamenev declares:
"I can admit only one thing: that having 1>et ourselves the
monstrously criminal aim of disorganizing the government of the
.land of socialism. we resorted to methods of struggle which in our
68

opinion suited thls aim and which are as low and as vile as the
aim which we set before ourselves."
In the further .process of the examination the accused Kamenev
still more clearly and definitely speaks of that which guided the
Zinovievites in their activities.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, your struggle against the leaders of
the Party and the government was guided by motives of a personal
base character-by the thirst for personal power?·
Kamenev: Yes, by the thirst for power of our group.
Vyshinsky: Don't you trunk that this has nothing in oommon
with soci:al ideals?
Kamenev: It has as much in common as :revo:Jutkm has with
counter-revolution.
Vyshinsky: That is, you are on the side of counter-revolution?
Kamenev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, you clearly perceive that you are
fighting a.gainst socialism?
Kamenev: We clearly perceive that we are fighting agaID.st the
leaders of the Party and of the government who are leading the
country to socialism.
Vyshinsky: Thereby you are fighting sociailism as well, aren't
you?
Kamenev: You are drawing the conclusion of an historian and
prosecutor.
_
At the end of the examination of the acoused Kamenev, Comrade Vyshinsky reminds h:im that in his testimony on Au6llsl 10
he stated that the conspirators intended, afier seizing power, to
appoint Balrnyev chief of the O.G.P.U. and so cover up lhe traces
of their crimes.
Kaanenev asse."""1s that the Trol:skyite-Zinovievite centre had in
this eonnection not the intention of physically exterminating those
who di.rectly committed terroristic acts, but of diverting the investigation of terroristic acts into false channels.
The aocused Reingold categorically a~s that the Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre intendeq to wipe out their gunmen terrorists
in order to shield the Trotskyite-Zinoviev:ite leaders and cover up
the traces of the crimes. Indignant at Kamenev'.s statement, Reingold says:
69

"L'et Kamenev not pretend that he is such an innocent creature.
He is a hardened politician who would force his way to power over
mountains of corpses. Would he hesitate to kill off one or two terrorists? No one will believe him!"
EXAMINATION OF THE WITNESS YAKOVLEV
The Court then proceeds to examine t'he witness Yakovlev,
summoned at· the request of the State Prosecutor.
Comrade Vyshinsky asks Yakovlev to tell about Kamenev's
connections with him, Yakovlev, in the terroristic activities pursued by Kamenev.
Yakovlev testifies that Karev, who worked with him in the
counter-revolutfonary group at the Academy of Sciences, had informed him of the following: In the autumn of 1932 the Zinovievltes organized a bloc with the Trotskyites. A united TrotskyiteZinovievite centre was set up. The principal method of fighting
against the Party and the 'Soviet government adopted by this centre was terrorism, which it was decided to direct against the leaders
of the Party and the government, in the first place against Stalin
and Kirov.
Continuing, Yakovlev says: "This was confirmed by Kamen7v
himself dn a conversation with me in 1934. In this connection Kamenev commissioned me to organize a terrorist group at the Academy of Sciences. I accepted this commission. At the same time
Kamenev informed me that instructions to prepare terroristic !!Cts
had been given also to other groups. In Moscow, preparations were
being made for an attempt on the life of Sta!il!, and in Leningrad
it was proposed to commit a terroristic act against Kirov, this mission being entrusted to the Rumyantsev-Kotolynov group."'
Vyshinsky: In his testimony the accused Kamenev mentioned
Yakovlev (turning to Kamenevj. ls this the Yakovlev in question?
Kamenev: Yes, it is.
Vyshinsky~ And did you meet him?
Kamenev: I did.
Vyshinsky: Did you entrust him with the task of preparing a
terroristic act parallel with that of the Bumy:mtsev-Kotolynov
group? Do you confirm this?
Kamenev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you, Yakovlev, do you confirm this?
70

Yakouleu: Yes.
After several questions have been put to Kamenev by TerVaganyan and Smirnov which elicited the fact that Ka.7nenev had
repeated conversations about terrorism with Ter-Vaganyan in 1~32,
the Court proceeds to examine the accused Zinoviev.
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED ZINOVlEV
Zinoviev begins his testimony by relating the history of the restoration of the united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre in 19<;2. He emphasizes that there never were any material differences l:Je~ween
the Trotskyites and the Zinovievites.
"Our differences with Trotsky after the Fifteenth Congress,"
says Zinoviev, "when Trotsky used the word 'ireachei:y' in :relation
to me and Kamenev, were really slight zig-zags, petty ilisagr1Xments. We committed no treachery whatever against Trntsky at
that time, but committed one more act of treachery agafr1st h'1.e
Bolshevik Party to which we befonged."
But it was precisely at that moment, says Zmov.iev, continuing
his testimony, that we were completely adoptin.g, as cur main line,
double-dealing to which we had already resorted previously, which
we had practised in 1926 and in 1927. In 1928, how-c•e:r, after the
Fifteenth Congress of the C.P.S.U., we could. not take a singie step,
we could not utter a single word without betraying the Party i...;.
one way or another, without resorting to double-dealing in one way
or another. "From 1928 to 1932," Zinoviev says further, "there w~.s
not for one moment any real difference between ourselves and the
Trolskyites. And so the logic of things carried us to terrn;ism.
"We banked on a growth of difficulties. We hoped that they
would grow to such an extent that we and the Rightists arui tiie
Trotskyites, and the smaller groups associated with them, could
come out openly. We dreamt of coming out in a united front. Al:
that time we thought that the Rightists had most chances of success,
that tli"eir prognoses were more likely to come truer and that their
names would have particular power of attraction. At that time we
attempted to place particular emphasis on our closeness to them."
Continuing, Zinoviev says: "At the same time certaiEJ. underground groups of the Right as well as of the so-called 'Left'
trend, sought contact with me and Kamenev. Approaches were
71

made by the remnants of tl1e 'Workers' Opposition': by Shlyapnikov and Medvedyev. Approaches came from ille groups of the socalled 'Leftists': that is, Lom:inadze, Shatskin, Sten and others. Approaches also canie from the so-called 'individuals,' to whose numbers belonged Smilga, and to a certain extent, So~olnikov."
Zinoviev furtihet says: "In the second half of 1932 we realized
that our banking on a growth of difficulties in the country had
failed. We began to realize that the Party and its Central Committee would overcome these difficulties. But bo!!h in the first and
in the second half of 1932 we were filled with hatred towards the
Central Committee of the Party and towards Stalin."
Continuing, Zinoviev says: "We wiere convinced that the leadership must be superseded ·at all costs, that it,must be superseded by
us, along with Trotsky. In this situation I had meetings with Smirnov who has accused me here of frequently telling untruths. Yes,
I often told untruths. I started doing that from the moment I be·
gan fighting the Bolshevik Party. In so far as SIIciirnov took the
road of fighting the Party, he too is telling untrullis. But it seems,.
the difference between him and myself is that I have decided firmly and irrevocably to tell at this last moment the truth, whereas,
he it seems has adopted a different decision.
Vyshinsky: Are you telling the whole truth now?
Zinoviev: Now I am telling the whole truth to the end.
Vyshinsky: Remember that on January 15-16, 1935, at tlhe sessions of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court, you also asserted that you were telling the whole truth.
Zinoviev: Yes. On Januruj 15-16 I did not tell the whole truth.
Vyshinsky: You did not tell the truth. but you maintained that
you were telling the truth.
Continuing his testimony, Zinoviev relates that during his conversations with Smimov in 1931 he conferred with him with re·
gard to an understand!ng on uniting the Trots~yites and the· Zinoviev-ites on the hsis of terrorism ·and thalt tlhis was done on Trotsky's.
instruction. "I. N. Smirnov entirely agreed with this instruction, and
carrieditoutwholeheartedlyand with conviction," testifiesZinoviev.
''I spoke a great deal with Smimov about choosing people for terroristic activities and also designated the persons against whom the
weapon of lerrori~m was to be directed. The name of Stalin was

"

mentioned in lihe first place, followed by tJ10se of Kirov, Voroshilov
and other leaders of the Party and the government. For the purpose of executing these plans, a Trotskyite-ZinovieYite terrorist
centre was formed, the leading part in which was played by myself-Zinoviev, and by Smirnov on behalf of the Trotskyites."
Vyshinsky: Thus, su.vnming up your testimcmy, we may draw
the conclusion llhat in the organization of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist bloc and centre, the decisive part was played, on the
one hand, by you, as the leader of the Zinovievites, and, on the
other, by Trotsky through hfa representatives?
Zinovie1': That is correct.
Vyshinsky: At that time Trotsky's principal representative and
even deputy in the U.S.S.R. was I. N. Smimov?
Zinoviev: That is correct.
Vyshinskg: Was the recognition of Ll-ie necessity of terrorism
the decisive condition for uniting the Trotskyites and Zinovievites?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you and Smirnov designate the persOOJS against
whom terror was to he directed in the first instance? Is it true that
these persons were Comrade Stalin, Comrade Kirov and Comrade
Voroshilov?
Zinoviev: That was Llie central question.
Continuing his testimony Zinoviev states, in reply to a question by Comrade Vyshinsky as to what practiool steps were taken
in preparation for the assassination of the leaders of the Party and
the government, that in ilhe autumn of 1932 a conference was held
in Ilyinskoye attended by himself, Kamenev, Evdokimov, Bakayev and Karev. At this conference Bakayev was entrasted with the
practical direction of matters connected with terrorism.
Continuing, Zinoviev says: "When Kamenev and I went into
exile after the Ryutin affair fell through, we left Evdokimov, Bakayev and Smirnov in charge of terroristic activities. We placed
special-hopes on Sm~rnov." "At the s:une time," says Zinoviev, "I
eondncted negotiations with Tomsky, whom I informed about our
bloc with the Trotskyites. Tomsky expressed complete solidarity
with us. After our return from exile the first steps we took were
directed toward liquidating, if one may so express it, the breakdown of our terroristic activities, the fiasco of the conspirators, and
73

toward restor.ing cO!lif.dence :in order to he able to continue our
terroristic activities later on. We continued- our tactics, which represented a combination of ever subtler forms of perfidious doubledealing wiith t!he preparation of the conspiracy."
"After the mul'der of Sergei Mir~ovich Kirov," says Zinoviev,
"our perfidy went to such lengths that I sent an obituary about
Kirov io Pravda. That obituary was not published. As far as I remember, Kamenev, and I think Evdokimov also, wrote obituaries
on Kirov. At all events, Kamenev knew that I would send in my
obituary.
Vyshinsky: Then you did that by preliminary arrangement?
Zinoviev: As far a.s I remember, I told Kamenev that I was
sending in an obituary. He, I think, said that he would either
send one himself or that the office at which he was working would
send a collective obituary whioh he would sign.
Vyshinsky: Don't you recall this, aroused Kamenev?
Kamenev: I do not remember. And I did not know that Zinoviev intended to send in an obituary. "I knew that after the events
of December 1, and after the arrest of Bakayev and Evdokimov,
Zinoviev came to me and showed me the draft of a letter addressed
to Yagoda, General C-Oinmissar of State Security, in which he
stated that he was disturbed by these arrests and asked to be summoned in order to establish the fact that he, Zinoviev, had nothing
to do with this murder.
Vgshinsky: Was tliat the case, accused Zinoviev?
Zinoviev: Yes, it was.
Kamenev: Then I said that he should not do that beoause I
thought that after all we had done we ought to keep some coµi:__

·::::..

posure.
Vyshinsky: Did you succeed in keeping your composure?
Kamenev.: Yes, I wrote no such letter.
After that, Zinoviev states, he sent Bakayev in 1934 to Leningrad to investigate the progress reached in the preparations for
the assassination of Kirov. Zino\"iev says: "I sent Bakayev to Leningrad as one who enjoyed our conlidcnce, who knew very well
the personnel of the tenorists, in order to check up on the people,
ihe situation, the degree of preparedness, etc. On his return from
Leningrad Bakayev reported ihat everything was in order."

74

Vyshinsky: Were you sure that everything was going on well?
Zinoviev: I considered that all the work had been done.
Vyshinsky: Did you hasten, did you expedite the assassination
of Kirov? Were there times when you expressed dissatisfaction
with a certain measure of slowness on the part of your terrorists?
Zinoviev: Yes, I expressed som,e dissatisfaction.
Vyshinsky: Can we say that you were not only the organizer
and inspirer of the assassination of Kirov, but also the organizer
of the more expeditious realizoation of this event?
Zinoviev: There was a time when I tried to expedite it.
Continuing his tesiimony, Zinoviev speaks of his meetings with
M. Lurye (Emel) who had brought Trotsky's teroorist instructions.
"l knew," Zinoviev says, "that M. Lurye was a Trotskyite, -and
not a TrotskyHe only, for when he spoke one could even ihear the
liang-tl!age of a fascist."
Vyshinsky: In what did his fasci:;;m show itself?
Zinoviev: His fascism showed itself when he said that in a
situation like the present we must resort to the use of every
possible means.
From a reply ro a question put by Comrade Vyshinsky to M.
Lurye it becomes clear that Zin-0viev met M. Lurye tlrree times
after i:he latter's arrival from Berlin. At one meeting between M.
I,urye a:atl Zino'\<iev, at the latter's apruimerri:, the conversation
between the ~o was frank. They discussed the terrorist instrue~<ms of Trotsky which M. Lurye had received in Berlin through
Ruth Fischer and Maslov, and which herthen conveyed to Zinoviev
through Herzberg.
M. Lurye says: "I asked Zinoviev wbe't:ber he was informed
about the c:ise of Nathan Lurye. Zinoviev replied in the afifirma·
tive."
Furtiher, M. Lurye told Zincwiev lhs.t Nathan Lurye was connected with a certain Franz Weitz. When Zinoviev asked who
Franz >Neitz was, M. Lurye informed him that Franz Weitz was a
ma..!l particularly trusted 'by Himmler, the present chlef of the
Gestapo. "! aJgain asked him,;, continues M. Lurye, "whether he
was posted on this group. Zinoviev replied in the a:ffinnative. To
my perplexed. question as to whether it was permissible for Marxists to practise individual terror a."ld maintain contact with fascist
'l'5

groups, followed the reply, 'You are an historian, aren't you, Moissei
Ilyieh,' and he drew the parallel of Bismarck and Lassalle, adding: 'why cannot we today utilize Himmler?' "
After Lurye' s replies Zinoviev. asserts that this sentence wa.'>
uttered by Lurye himself. He admits however that Lurye actually visited him in his apartment and discussed terrorism with
him.
Replying to a que<>tion put to him by Comrade Ulrich, President
of the Comt, about the part he, Zinoviev, played in preparing a
terroristic act against Comrade Stal<in, Zinoviev says that he tuok
part in this affair and that he knew of two attempts on the life of
Comrade Stalin in which Reingold, Dreitzer and Pickel had taken
part. Zinoviev also confirms that he recommended bis private secretary, Bogdan, to Bakayev, the leader of the terrorist groups, as the
one to assassinate Comrade Stalin.
Vyshins~y: Did you recommend Bogdan to Bakayev for the
purpose of carrying out the assassination of Comrade Stalin? Do
you confirm that?
Zinoviev: I do.

EXAMINATION OF THE WITNESS SAFONOVA
The court then proceeds to examine the witness Saifonov~
whose case has been set aside for separate trial and who was summoned at the request of the State Prosecuror.
Saifonova testifies that she was a member of the Trotsky~
ite centre and took an active part in the work of that centre.
She goes on to say that in 1931 I. N. Smimov informed the
centre of the Trotskyite organization, in the persons CYf Ter-Vagany.an, Mrachkovsky and he11self, that be had received in Berlin, through Sedov, instructions to adopt terroristic methods of
struggle. I. N. Smimov, in conveying these instructions, em;phasized
that they came from Trotsky. Safonova further testifies: "At that
same meeting Smirnov informed us that the centre had deoided to
adopt terrorism, and in the first place to commit a terroristic act
against Stalin. In 1932 Smirnov received from Trotsky directions
brought by .Gaven. These directions were a direct confirmation
76

of Trotsky's instruction on terrorism previously received by Smirnov through Sedov. Smirnov also informed us about these directions. These directions were not only a confirrnation of those conveyed through Sedov, but were at the same time instructions on
the necessity of hastening i:he terroristic act against Stalin-:-"
Safonova cites another fact illustrating I. N. Smirnov's attitude towards terrorism. "One day," she says, "Mrachkovsky, on
returning from an official visit to Stalin, related his conversation
with Stalin. I myself and I. N. Smimov were present. In relating his
conversation with Stalin, Mrachkovsky linked up his story with
the prospects of our furtheir sb:uggle and declared that the only
way out was to assassinate Stalin. I. N. Smirnov strongly backed
Mrachkovsky's conclusion.
"Before my departure for the Amur-Baikal railway construction job in December 1932," says Safonova, continuing her evidence, "I had a conversation with Smirnov about the further work
of our organization in connection with the decision on terrorism
which had been adopted. I. N. Smimov categorically confirmed
that Stalin must be assassinated, that Stalin would be assassinated."
Smirnov denies that he had passed on to Ter-Vaganyan,
Mrachkovsky and Safonova Trotsky's instruction to adopt terrorism. He also denies that, when Mrachkovsky returned afte< his
talk with Stl!lin, he spoke of the necessity of assassinating Stalin.
However, replies to questi<Jns put by Comrade Vyshinsky to TerVaganyan, Safonova and Mrnchkovsky establish that this actuaily
did take place.
In view of the fact that Safonova's evidence completely exposed
Smirnov, Comrade Vyshinsky makes clear the relations between
Smirnov and Safonova.
VyshiIJsky: What were your relations with Safonova?
Sl!lirn-ov: Good.
Vyshinsky: And more?
Smirnov: We were intimately related.
Vyshinsky: You were husband and wife?
Smirnov:" Yes.
Vyshinsky: No personal grudges between you?
77

Smirnov: No.
The evidence of the accused and of witnesses utte&ly exposes
Smirnov as one of the principal leaders of terrorism against the
leaders of the Party and the. Soviet government, which Smirnov
pursued on the direct instructions of Trotsky.
This concludes the morning session.

78

AUGUST 20 (EVENING SESSION)
EXAMI:>iATION OF THE ACCUSED I. N. SMIRNOV
A great part of the evening session is taken up by the examin·
ation of the accused I. S. Smirnov.
I. N. Smirnov was one of the leaders of the Trotskyite organization since its formaiion, the closest friend of Trotsky and ~he
actual organizer and !e:ider of ihe underground Trotskyite counter-revolutionary acthities in the U.S.S.R., who maintained personal connections with Trotsky and the Trotskyite organizations
abroad.
Smirnov, Trotsky's deputy l.n the U.S.S.R., as the accused have
defined him, and the lea&er of the Trotskyite centre, denies his
own direct part in the terroristic activities and only partly admits his crimes.
In ~fay 1931 Smirnov went abroad on an official business trip.
In Berlin he met Sedov, Trotsky's son and agent. Smim.ov claims
that this was an "accidental" meeting. During his "accidental"
meeting, Smirnov hastened to make errangemen!s with Sedov
about their next meeting which took plaoe in Smirnov's lodgings.
Sedov told Smirnov that it was necessary to change the old
methods of struggle against the Party, and that the time had
arrived to adopt terroristic methods of struggle. Smirnov tries
to make it appear that this was Sedov's own opinion with which
be, Smfrnov, allegedly did not agree. NeverL'leless, Smirnov right
there ·promised Sedov to establish communications with him, and
to establish "informational" cornmunications with Trotsky. Smirnov received from Sedov two addresses for correspondence and
agreed with him upon a passwc,rd for sending agents. On his return
to Moscow, Smimov immediately informed bis associates of his
conversation with Sedov regarding terrorism.
79

Vyshinsky: Although you were not in agreement with Sedov,
you nevertheless thought it necessary to inform your underground
organization about this terroristic line?
Smirnov: Yes, I did not anticipate that they would take this
information as Trotsky's directions.
This assertion, however, is refuted by the testimony of the accused Mrachkovsky, whom· Smimov had informed that in Berlin
he had established contact, through Sedov, with Trotsky from
whom the directions on terrorism had originated.
, Vyshinsky: When Sm.irnov told you about his conversation
with Sedov, you understood the contents of the conversation lo
be not mere information but instructions?
Mrachkovsky: Yes.
VyS'hinsky: What did those instructions say?
Mrachkovsky: They said that the instructions which had existed up to that time, that is up to 1931, had become obsolete. Trotsky proposed that another met!hod, a sharper method, be adopted.
Vyshinsky: Who pro~, Sedov or Trotsky?
Mrachkovsky: Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: Did Smirnov speak about Trotsky?
Mrachkovsky: Yes, he spoke about Trotsky, since Sedov wa'J
no authority either for him or for us.
Vyshinsky: Accused Smimov, is it true that Sedov was not an
authority for yo~?
Smirnov: No, Sedov was not an authority for me.
The aocused Sm.irnov tr:ies at first to assert that in 1931 and in
1932 Trotsky was no authority for him either. However be immediately admits that in 1932 ·he received through Yuri Gaven
instructions from Trotsky urging the adoption of terrorism against
the leaders of the Party and the government; he accepted these
instructions for the purpose of carrying them out, and communicated them to the centre.
Vyshinsky: Was the centre organized on the basis of terrorism?
Smirnov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Were you a member of that centre?
Smirnov: Yes, I was.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, those instructions were meant for
you too?
80

Smfrncv: Yes. 1h-ey wet"e oomm:.mics.ted to me.
Vysllimky: They were not <miy communicated through you,

but were also ill1lslrucfoir,s fo·r you?
SmiE"Eiov: Th·c-y were foirwair<led a~ instructions.
Vyshinsky: Did you acttpi !hem?
Smieru.N:J.G Yes.

l!yshimicy: !Hi&>'!' can ym.1 maiir;tak., then, that Trotsky, from
whom the£e ilils~rnc![o;rns orgilll'.~led, was not an 11.uthoriiy for you'!
Smirnov triis fo; red;u:ce :his; cvrn part to that of merely commtmkafa:.g Trn1s~y'g n;;r,s 1! 1r;.;:.i:;ilo<11s io the cenire; he tries to evade
responslll::i!fi~~r ffotr ~:r~ 11ro!"k .nf ~he cenh:e.
Smir;nov: ii Esk1ne<l io 1faose >imtructions and communicated
them !o ii'lle ceni.re. T!'Je cenir•c accepted t.~em, but I did not take
pa;t in if•.l! 1"T'1l·rk.
"ilysh!nsks: S·t:J:. wl11·:e81 di~1 yot! leave llie centre?
Smi.rnov: K did not in~enrl !('resign; the;e was nothing to resign
from.
Vyshinskt?: Di~1 the een~re e~is~?
Smfrnov: \l\lha~ sort 0>f .a cent;re.
Vy1.1hinekg;: M;rachkovsky, did ti';e centre exist?
l1irachko1uky: 'Ye§.
Vyshi;m;k~1: Zi111ovic11, <lh!i ~he c.entie eA.isl?
Zh~oviev: 'k'c-s.
Vysl!in.d:y: Evclokim0v, lillci !\'ae centre exist?
Evdokimov: Ves.
Vysh.in.~k§: Bakayev, did foe 100n~re exist?
Bakayev: Yes.
Vyshi.ml:g: H;:;.w, t~:t-:~c'l!, Smirnov, .can you take the liberty to
maintain ihat no reii!tire ~~dsie<l?
Smh-nov once ag~i~n reiers to the abse~ce of meetings of the centre, i:m.M:he te:;;timrnny ())i Zh!ovliev, Tei:-Vaganyan a.nd Mrachkovsky
again prnv·es him Ro be !yiThg. fa reply to ques.tions put to him hy
llie S~e Prnse.eub:-, Zi!IT!ov2ev confirms the fact that he was iH
conti11u.lld1"1s coamu'nlication with Smirnov. Ter-Vaganyan confirms the mle &z:iirrc<>'! ;,:;,~syd g.s the leader oi. the Trotfilr.yite part
of the bloc, wh::. ':'rnc:ked to crgfi!!!llize, consolidate and unite the two
parts of the bloc. Mrnehb:J>'!£K}' says: "Smimov is trying to pass
61

as a simple village postman, but we regarded Smirnov as Trotsky's
deputy."
fa connection with Smirnov's testimony, the accused Olberg
informs the Couri of his repeated meetings with Sedov, Trotsky's
son, in Berlin, in 1931. At one of these meetings, in No\•ember. December 1931, Sedov informed Olberg of his meeting with I. N.
Smirn.ov. Sedov spoke with great respect of Smirnov, as the
leader of me Trotskyite organization in the U.S.S.R. He 1said that
he, Sedov, had communicated to Smirnov Trotsky's instructions
on the necessit'f to embark upon terroristic activi:lii.es. Olberg further siate.s that he and the other Trotskyites abroad and in the
Soviet Union :regarded Sedov solely as a vehicle for transmitting
lli.e wm, fae tasks and the policy of Trotsky.
The further examination of Smirnov confirms that the accused
received. and passed on additional instructions from Trotsky on
~errnrism.

Vyshinskp: It can be considered as established that in 1932.you
rec(•ived fresh instructions from Trotsky through Gaven'!
Smirnov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did these instructions contain direct reference to the
necessity of embarking on a terroristic struggle .against the leadership of the Pa.'1y?
Smirnov: Quite true.
l'yshinsky: In the first place, against whom?
Smfrnov: No names were mentioned there.
Yy.~l!insky: But you understood that the terroristic struggle
w:ts fo begin first against Comrade Stalin 1
:Smirnov: Yes, I understood it to mean that.
1"11..hinsky: And that is what you communicated to your colleagues?
Smirnov: 1:. . es.
The accused persists in his evask>ns and tries to deny the part
he played as the leader of the Trotskyite. organization. The Court
investigation deals in de>.aii with this question; The examination
of the accused elidts tlhe fact that it was on the direct instructions of Smimov that Ter-Vaganyan negotiat.ed with the.Zinoviev.
Hes about the bloc. It becomes clear that Mrachkovsky trained ter·
rori!lt groups on the direct instructions of Smirnov. It is con·
:s2

firmed that neither Ter-Vaganyan nor Mrachkovsky gave any
instructions to Smirnov, but themselves received instructions
from him. And finally, the fact is elicited that direct communica~
tion with Trotsky was maintained personally by Smirnov right up
lo his arre!>t. Under the weight of all these irrefutable facts Smir-:
nov at last admits that it was he and no one else who was the head
of the Trolskyite organizalion.
But the accused makes this confession only aiter the prosecution has exposed him by absolutely incontrovertible facts.
Desiring
CO\"Cr up the traces of his activities in organizing
the terrorist Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc, Sroimov tries to invent a
new version saying lhat the bloc was organized without his direct
participation. From the testimony of the accused it appears however that the formation of the bloc was the result of direct negotiations between Smirnov and Zinoviev, Kamenev and Ter-V.aganyan, Evdokimov an<! Mrachkovsky, and that these negotiations
for the organizaliou of the bloc were conducted on the basis o[
the first instructions on terror received by Smimov from Trotsky
through Sedov in 1931.
The State Proseeutor then inquires into Smirnov's contact with
Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: Did you have direct communication with Trotsky?
Smirnov: I had two addresses.
Vyshinsky: l ask you, was there any commupication?
Smirnov: I bad two addresses. . . .
Vgshimky: Answer, was there any communication?
Smirnov: If having addresses is called communication.
Vyshinsky: What do you call ii?
Smir11ov: I said that I received two adclref>ses.
Vyshin.sky: Did you maintain communication with Trotsky?
Smirnou: I had two addresses.
Vyshinsky: Did you maintain personal communication?
Smirnov: There was no personal communication.
Vyshinskg: Was there oomrmmkation by mail with Trotsky?
Smirnov: There was communication by mail with Trotsky's
son.
Vyshinsky: Was the letter you received through Gaven sent by
Sedov or by Trotsky?

to

Smirnov: Gaven brought a letter from Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: That is what I am asking you. Did you haw any
communication with Trotsky-yes or no?
Smirnov: I say that I wrote a letter to Trotsky and received a
reply from him.
Vgshinsky: Is that communication or not?
Smirnov: It,is.
Vyshinsky: So there was communication?
Smirnov: There· was.
Other irrefutable facts are also established. Ter-Vaganyan,
Mrachkovsky, Zinoviev and Evdokimov tell. about conversations
which Smirnov carried on in 1931 concerning the tasks he assigned
at that time for the training of terrorists.
Vyshinsky: Did you give instructions to the group?
Sziiirnov: No, I did not.
Vyshinsky {to Mrachkovsky) : Mrachkovsky, did Smirnov give
•
you such instructions?
Mrachkovsky: Yes. Instructions were given in the beginning of
1931 on his return from abroad.
Vyshinsky: What did he say to you?
Mrachkovsky: That it was necessary to begin the selection of
people whom we knew well, that a serious task was put before
us, that the people to be selected must he resolute. He said this
in his apartment.
Smirnov: Was it at my apartment? Where is my apartment?
Mrachkovsky: This was in 1931 on the Pressnya.
Vyshinsky: Did he visit you on the Pressnya?
Smirnov: Not on the Pcessnya itself but in that district.
Vyshinsky: Accused Zinoviev, you said that Smirnov discussed
terrorism with you more than once, discussed the necessity to
expedite terroristic acts?
Zinoviev: Correct.
Vyshinsky: So what Mrachkovsky says ahout the terrorist
group is true?
Zinoviev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Accused Smirnov, do you think that TerVaganyan, Mraehkovsky and Evdokimov are telling untmths?
84

Smirnov: (Does not answer.)
l'ysl1insky: What then do you admit?
Smir11ov: I admit that I belonged to U1e underground Trotskyite organization, joined the bloc, joined the centre of this bloc,
met Sedov in Berlin in 1931, listened to his opinion on terrorism
and passed !his opinion on lo Moscow. I admit that I received
Trotsky's instructions on terrorism from Gaven and, although not
in agreement with them, I communicated them to the Zinovievites through Ter-Vaganyan.
Vyshinsky: And, while not in agreement, you remained a
member of the bloc and worked in the bloc'f
Smirnov: I did not resign officially from the bloc, but actually
I did no work.
Vyshinsky: So when you communicated the instructions,
you were doing no work?
Smirnov: (Does not answer.}
Vyshinsky: \Vhat"do you think, when an organizer communicates instructions, is that work?
Smirnov: Of course.
Vyshinsky: You participated in the bloc?
Smirnov: Yes.
Vyshinsk!F And you admit that the bloc stood on.the position
of terrorism?
Smirnov: Yes:
Vyshinsky: You also admit that it stood on this position in
connection with instructions received frem Trotsky?
Smirnov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And it was you who received these instructions?
Smirnov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, it wa!". you who got the bloc to adopt
the positi9n of terrorism?
Smirnov: I ptssed on the instructions on terrorism.
Vyshinsky: Ii you confirm thait, after the receipt of Trotsky's
instructions, the position of the bloc was that of terrorism, then
it should be said that the bloc took up the position of terrorism
after you received the instructions from Trotsky and passed them
.on to the members of the bloc?
!i5

Smirnov: I received these instructions, communicated them to
the Trotskyites and Zinovievites, and they formed the centre. 'While
not in agreement, I did not resign from the bloc officially, but
actually I was not a member of the bloc.
Vyshinsky: Ter-Vaganyan, did Smirnov leave the bloc?
Ter-Vaganyan: No.
Vyshinsky: Mrachkovsky, did Smirnov leave the bloc?
Mrachkovsky: No.
Vgshinsky: Dreitzer, did you know lhat Smirnov had leH the
bloc?
Dreitzer: If giving instructions to organize terrorist groups is
leaving the bloc, then yes.
Vyshinslcy: Evdokimov, did you hear of Smimov leaving the
bloc?
Evdokimov: No, the very opposite; he remained a member of
the centre and did active work in it.
Vyshinsky: Did he share the terroristic views?
Evdokimov: Yes, he shared them.
Vgshinslcy: Accused Kamenev, what do you know about
Smirnov's leaving llie bloc?
Kamenev: I confirm fhat Smirnov was a member of the bloc
all ihe time.
Vyshinsky: Aceused Smirnov, that doses the circle.
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED OJ,BERG
The Court then proceeds to examine the accused Olberg.
The President: Accused Ofuerg, do you confinu your principal
testimony on terroristic work?
·
Olberg: I confirm it fully and completely.
Vyshinsky: How long have you been connected with Trutsky··
ism?
Olberg rna:kes ·a detailed statement to the effect that he
was a memlber of the German Trotskyite organization since
1927-28. His contact with Trotsky and Sedov, Trotsky's son, begm:
in 1930. This contact was arranged by an active member ef tbP.
German Trotskyite organization, Anton Grllevich, the publisher of
Trotsky's pamphlets in German. At first contact was estabEshcl
86

Vyshi11sky: Connection between t11e German Trolskyites and
the German police-was tllat systematic?
Olberg: Yes, it was systematic and it was done with Trol~ky's
consent.
Vyshinsky: How do you know that ii was done with Trotsky'f>
knowledge and consent?
Olberg: One of these lines of connection was maintained
by myself. My connection was established with the sanction of
Trotsky.
Vyshimky: Your personal connection with whom?
Olberg: \Vi!h the fascist secret police.
Vyslzin.~ky: So it can he said that you yourself admit connection with the Gestapo?
Olberg: I do not deny this. In 1933 there began organized
systematic connection between the German Trotskyil.es and the
German fascist police.
The accused Olberg then proceeds to give a1i account of circumstances and facts directly relating to his visits to the U.S.S.R.
He went to the Soviet Union three limes.
The first time Olberg went to the U.S.S.R. was at the end of
March, 1933, when he travelled with a false p:tssport in the name
of a certain Freudigmann. He had obtained this passport in Berlin. Olberg remained in the Soviet Union up to the end of July
1933. The purpose of the visit was to prepare and cany out lhe assassinatfr~n of Comrade Stalin.
On arriving in the U.S.S.R. Olberg lived secretly in Moscow
for six weeks, and then went to Stalinabad, where he obtained~
position as teacher of history. As he had no documents regarci:iri"(f:
military service, be was obliged to return abroad and went . to
Prague.
From Prague Olberg wrote to Sedov informing him about his
failure.
Sedov replied saying that he must not lose heart and promised
to try to obtain a better passport.
Meanwhile Olberg himself succeeded in obtaiuing a passport in
Prague. His younger brother, Paul Olberg, lh·ed in Prague and
was connected with Tukalevsky, an agent of the German secret
88

police in Prague. Paul Olberg cheered up his brother, stating that
Tukalevsky could help him in .. this trouble."
Olberg: After 1933 I visited Tukalcvsky with my younger
brother.
Vy.~hinsky: Who is Tukalevsky'?
Olberg: Tukalevsky is the director of the Slavonic Library of
the .Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Prague. I learned from my brother that he was :in agent of the fascist secret police. Tukalevsky
had been informed that I would visit him, and he told me that he
would try to get the necessary documents for me.
Then, continues Olberg, I wrote a letter to Sedov in Paris telling him about the proposal made by the agent of the Gestapo, and
asked him to inform me whether L. D. Trotsky would approve of
an arrangement with such an agent. After i.ome time I received a
reply sanctioning my actions, that is to say, my understanding
with Tukalevsky. Sedov wrote saying that the strictest secrecy was
necessary, and that none of the other members of the Trotskyite
organization was to be informed about this understanding.
Through Tukalevsky and through a certain Benda, Olberg obtained a passport from Lucas.Parades, Consul-General of the Republic of Honduras in Berlin, who had arrived iu Prague at that
time.
Olberg: He sold me the passport for 13,000 Czechoslovak kronen. This money I received from Sedov.
Vyshinsky: Did you have any connection with the Repuhlic of
Honduras?
Olberg: No, never.
Vyshinsky: Permit me to show this: is this the passport? (The
commandant of the Court presents the passport.}
Olberg: Yes, that is the one. It really was issued by a real
consul in the. name of the Republic of Honduras. There ls such ~
republic in Central America.
Vyshinsky: Perhaps your parents had some connection with
that republic?
Olberg: No.
Vyshinsky: Your forefathers?
Olberg: No.
Vyshinsky: And you yourself-where are you from?
89

Olberg: I am from Riga.
This time, continues Olberg, I intended to travel to the
U.S.S.R. by way of Germany. Tukaievsky advised me to meet
Slomovitz in Berlin. I had known her previously. Tukalevsky told
me that the Berlin Trotskyiles had concluded an agreement with
the Gestapo and that if I met Slomovitz in 13<-rlin I could obtain
assistance and help from her if I needed ii.
I visited Slomovitz in 13erlin, and she told me the following:
During my absence the Trotskyite cadres dwindled to a small
group, and they were now confronted with the dilemma:: either to
dissolve or to come to an agreement with the German fascists. The
basis for the a1;reement was the preparation and carrying out of
acts of terrorism against the leaders of the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet
government. Trotsky had sanctioned the agree~ent between the
Berlin Trotskyites and the Gestapo, and the Trotskyites were in
fact left free.
From ahe point of view of the Berlin Trotskyites, the overllirow of the SOviet system, the fight against the Soviet government, was conceivable in two way~: either by intervention, or by
individual terroristic ads. The assassination of Kirov, according
to Slomovitz, showed that terroristic acts against the leaders of
the Party and the government could ·be carried ()Ut in the Soviet
Union.
In Slomovitz's apartment I met an employee of the Gestapo, to
whom she dntroduced me, and he informed me that if I needed
assistance he would ·willingly help me in preparing terroristic
acts, in the first place against Stalin.
In March, 1935. Olberg arrived in the Soviet Union for ihe
second time. This·visit was also fruitless because he.had a tourist
11isa, could not sfay long, and had to return to Germany after a
few days. There he remained for three months, and again received
instructions from Sedov to make another attempt. In July i 935
Olberg again went to the Soviet Union.
After remaining in Minsk for a short time, he went to Gorky,
and there he established contact with the Trotskyites Yelin and
Fedotov. He soon obtained employment in the Gorky Pedagogical
Institute; ·where he remained until his ar;est. It was here, in
90

Gorky that pk:ns were worked out for an attempt on 1the life of
Comrade Stalin.
VyshinsJ.:y: Did you obtain the Honduras passport nfter your.
second rel\l.irn?
Olberg: The second time also I came on the Honduras passport.
Vyshimky: Did you come on a tourist visa?
Olberg: Yes, but I had the Honduras passport.
l'yshinslq;: How were you able fo gel. an extension of that
passport ~he second Hme?
Olberg: 1! managed that . . . I forgot to say that at this time
my brothei: moved to the Soviet Union.
Vyshinsky: There is a gap here in your testimony. In what
capacUy did your broiliei:, Paul Olberg, arrive here?
Oibei-g: What aasks Tukalevsky gave him I do not know. But
I advised him to go to the Soviet Union S'.> that he could help me to
gain a fooUwkl.
Vyshimky: \\'hy did he have to help you in gaining a foothold?
Olberg: He is an engineer, and it was much easier for him to
obtain employment. He had genuine documents. At any rate, not
such fictitious papers as I had.
Vy.~hinsky: So your brother arrived in the U.S.S.R. on a genuine German passport, and as an engineer could more easily gain
a foothold here?
Olberg: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did your brother have any connection with the
Gestapo?
Olberg: He was Tukalevsky's agent.
Vyshinsky: An agent of the fascist police?
Olberg: Yes.
Vyshinsky: When did you have that talk with Sedov about not
permitting the Trotskyite organization to be compromised?
Olberg: That was at the time of my second journey. He said
that if I were arrested by the organs of state security of the U.S.S.R.,
I was under no circumsfances to say that this terroristic act was
carried out Qlil Trotsky's instructions, and at all events, I was to
.try to conces.! Trotsky's role.
91

Vyshinsky: W·hom did he advise you to throw the blame on
for the organization of terroristic acts?
Olberg: On the \Vhilc Guards, on the Gestapo.
Vyshinsky: Consequently. we may put it this way: you, Vale11tine Olberg, were connected with Trotsky through his son Sedov;
you were sent on Trotsky's direct instructions, conveyed through
Sedov, to the U.S.S.R. as Trotsky's agent to prepare and carry
out a terroristic act against Comrade Stalin?
Olberg: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In order to ensure the success of this work, you
were connected through your brother with the German police?
Olberg: Yes, that is so.
Vyshinsky: Now tell us how you prepared the terroristic act.
Olberg stales that even before his arrival in Gorky he
.learned from Sedov that an underground Trolskyite organization
existed in the U.S.S.R., the leaders of which were Smirnov and
Mrachkovsky. He also knew about Bakayev, whom Sedov referred
to as a man with "extreme te1Toristic" inclinations. In Gorky Olberg
learned from Fedotov that aetion detachments had been organized before his arrival. All that he had to do was to draw up the
plan for the attempt at assassination.
The terroristic act was to have been committed in Moscow on
May 1, 1936.
Vyshinsky: What prevented you from carrying out this plan?
Olberg: The arrest.
Vyshinsky: Did you :inform Sedov of the progress of the preparations for the terroristic act?
·
Olberg: Yes, I wrote him several times at Slomovitz's address.
And I received a letter from her stating that our old friend insisted
that the thesis for the diploma be submitted by May 1.
Vyshinsky; Thesis for the diploma-what is that?
Olberg; The assassination of Stalin.
Vyshinsky: And the old friend-who is that?
Olberg: The old friend-that is Trotsky.
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED BERMAN-YURIN
The Court proceeds to examine the accused Berman-Yurin.
The President: Berman-Yurin, tell us what instructions you
92

received abroad before your departure for the· Soviet Union?
Bermcm-Yurin: I received instructions from Trotsky to go to
the Soviet Union to commit a terroristic act against Stalin. I violif P.d
Trotsky personally in Copenhagen in November 1932. The meeting
was a!Tanged by Sedov.
In rl'ply to Comrade Vyshinsky's questions. Berman-Yurin tells
of his acquaintance of long standing with Trotsky's son, Sedov,
and of his Trotskyite activities beginning with 1931. He was
introduced to Sedov by one of the leaders of the German Trotskyiles, Grilevich. Then Berman-Yurin goes on to speak of his meetings
with Sedov.
llerman-Yurin: I had a number of talks with Sedov. Sedov
systematically tried to persuade me, and convinced me, that the
fight against the Communist Party was a fight against Stalin. At
the end of 1931 Sedov asked me to see him and wanted to know
whether I knew a trusted and reliable German who could carry out
an important mission which would involve a journey to Moscow. I
mentioned the name of Alfred Kundt whom I knew as a staunch
Trotskyite.
On Sedov's proposal, Berman-Yurin met Alfred Kundt and
communicated to him the conversation he had had with Sedov.
Kundt agreed to go to Moscow. The mission was as follows: he had
to take to a certain address in Moscow two documents ·from Trotsky, one of which- was Trotsky's instructions on the tasks of the
terrorist underground organization in the U.s.s:R. In Moscow
Alfred Kundt was to establish personal contact with Smi~ov and
hand him the two documents.
Berman-Y11rin: One document concerned Trotsky's latest po<iition on questions referring to the international s!tuation, mainly
Germany. I read the second document very carefully. It was written in the handwriting of Sedov and it contained Trotsky's directions concerning the tasks of the Trotskyite underground organir zation in the U.S.S.R. The letter stated that it was necessary to
prepare to adopt resolute and extreme means of struggle, and
that with this in view, resolute people sharing Trotsky's position
had to be selected. Particular attention, stated the letter, was to be
paid to the Trotskyites who were members of the C.P.S.U., but
who were not compromised as Trotskyites in the ranks of the
93

Party. The organization was to be built up on the principles of
strictest secr.eey, iri small groups, not connected with each other.
so that the discovery of one group might not iead to the discovery
of the whole organization.
Alfred Kundt left for Moscow in January-February 1932. A
few days later it became known that he had been at the secret address, had handed over the documents, had received the reply as
had been arranged, but had not met Smirnov as the latter was
not in Moscow. Kundt also reported that he had settled near Moscow, that he had achieved some success. in his work, and that
"things were going ·all right."
Berman-Yurin deals in- detail with t'he circumstances of his
1
meeting and conversation with Trotsky in Copenhagen.
Berman-Yurin: In November 1932 I had a meeting wilh Sedov
which I remember very well because Sedov then, for the first time,
spoke openly about the necessity of preparing to assassinate the
leaders of the C.P.S.U. Evidently, Sedov noticed.that I was wavering and he said that Trotsky would be in Copenhagen shortly and
asked me whether I would not like to go there and meet Trotsky.
I, of course, expressed my agreement.
I arrived lin Copenhagen early in the morning. This was at the
end of November, between the 25th and the 28th of Nowmber, 1932.
I was met at the station by Grilevich and we went to see Trotsky.
Grilevich introduced me to Trotsky and left; I remained in the
room alone with Trotsky.
Now I come to my conversation with Trotsky. I had two meetings with him. First of all he began to sound me on my work
in the past. He asked me why I had gone over to the position of
Trotskyism. I told him about this in great detail. Then Trotsky
passed to .Soviet affairs. Trotsky said: The principal quesiion is the
question of .Stalin. Stalin must be p·hysically destroyed. He said
that other methods of struggle were now ineffective. He said U1at
for this purpose people were needed who would dare anything,
who would agree to sacrifice themselves for this, as he expressed it,
historic task.
\Vith this the first conversation came to an end. Trotsky went
somewhere. Berman-Yurin remained in the apartment and waited
for his return.
94

Bcrmcm-Y:urin: In the evening we continued our conversation.
I asked him how individual terrorism could be reconciled with
Marxism. To this Trotsky replied: problems cannot be treated in
a dogmatic way. He said that a situation had arisen in the Sm·iet
Union which Marx could not have foreseen. Trotsky also said tha~
in addition to Stalin it was necessary to assassinate KaganoYich and
Voroshilov.
Vyshinsky: VV'bat other questions did he touch upon besides
questions of terrorism?
Berman-l"urin: Trotsky also expressed his views on the siiu>l.tion in the event of interven!ion against !he Soviet Union. He adopted an absolutely clear defeatist attitude. He also said that the Trotskyites must join the army, but that they would not defend the Soviet Union.
Vyshinsky: Did he convince you?
Berman-Yurin: During the conversation he nervously pa-ced
up and down the room and talked of Stalin with exceptional hatred.
Vyshinsky: Did you give your consent?
Berman-Yurin: Yes.
Vgsl1insky: Did your conversation end there?
Berman-Yurin: I also had a talk with Trotsky about the following. After I had given my consent he said that I must get ready
to go to Moscow, and as I would hav!l contact with the Com:intern
I was to prepare the terroristic act taking advantage of this contact.
Vyshinsky: So Trotsky not only gave you general instructions,
but also formulated your task in a concrete way?
Berman-Yurin: He said that the terroristic act should, if possible, be timed to take place at a plenum or at the congress of tlw
Comintern, so that the shot at Stalin would ring out in a large as, sembly. This would have a tremendous rcpercu<>sion far beyond
the borders of the Soviet Union and would give rise to a mass
movement all over the world. This would be an historical political
event of world significance. Trotsky said that I should not have
,,,contact with any Trotskyites in Moscow, and that I should car.ry
'on the work independently. I replied that I did not know any·
body in Moscow and it was difficult for me to see how I should act
under these circumstances. I said that I had an acquaintance named
Frit.z David, and asked whether I might not get in touch with him.
95

.Trotsky replied that he would instruct Scdov to clear up this mat·ter and that he would give him instructions to this effl'c!.
This conversation took place at the end of !llovember, 19~2.
Berman-Yurin left·for Moscow in l\farch, 19:3:>. Beforl' his departure Sedov instructed him to get in touch with Fritz David and to
prepare the terroristic act in conjunction with him. Soon after his
arrival in !lloscow Berman-Yurin met Frit1. David, and together
they discussed the terroristic plan and began to make preparations
to carry it out. At first they thought it possible to make :m attempt
on Comrade Stalin's life at the XIII Plenum of the E.C.C.I. Fritz
David was to have secured an admission ticket for llerman-Yurin
who was to shoot at Stalin. On the eve of the Plenum, however, it
was found that no ticket c1,mld be obtained for Ilerman-Yurin, and
the plan failed. It was decided to postpone the assassination of
Comrade Stalin until the Congress of the Comintem.
Berman-l'urin: The Congress was to have been convened in
September 1934. I gave Fritz David a. Browning pistol and bullets
to hide. But before the opening of the Congress Fritz David informed me that he had again failed lo obtain a ticket for me, but
that he himself would be at the Congress. \Ve ~reed that he should
be the one to comm.it the terroristic act.
Several days later I met Fritz David, and he said that he could
not manage to shoot. He was sitting in a box in which there were
many people and there was no possibility of shooting. Thus, this
plan failed too_
ln December Fritz David informed me that an emissary from
Sedov and Trotsky had been to see him recently and wanted lo
know why the terroristic act had not been committed_ Fritz David
gave him detailed information, and received instructions to take
advantage of another opportunity, to expedite the preparations for
the act and to take advantage of some conference or reception to
which I or Fritz David were to gain entry at all costs and there to
a~ssinate Stalin.
In May 1936 Fritz David informed me that another emissary
- a German-had arrived from Trotsky and visited him, and had
!ipoken to him extremely sharply, accusing· us of being inactive,
irresolute, lacking courage, and had literally demanded that we
96

take advantage or any opportunity that might arise to assassinate
Stalin. We must· make baste, we must not lose time, he said.
At the end of May 1936 l was arrested and my terroristic activities were stopped.
At the end of the examination of Berman-Yurin Comrade Vyshinsky once again questions him about his meetings with Trotsky's son, Sedov. Berman-Yurin testifies that be had had frequent
meetings with him in the period from the end of 1931 to March,
1933.
Vyshinsky: Both Trotsky and Sedov raiied before you the
question of terrorism and urged you to agree to commit a terroristi<;
act?
Berman-Yurin: Quite true.
Vyshinsky: You gave your consent and were· sent by Trotsky?
Berman-Yurin: By Trotsky through ·sedov.
After the examination of Berman-Yurin the evening session
of Augu!j,t 20 closes.

AUGUST 21 (MORNI!\G SESSION)
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED HOLTZMAN
The.morning session of August 21 begins with the examination
of the accused Holtzman.
Holtzman was one of the most active members of the Trotskyite counter-revolutionary organization, personaHy connected with
the !eader of the Trotskyite centre in the U.S.S.R.-1. N. Smimov.
On Smirnov's instructions he maintained contact with the
Trotskyite centre abroad.
In 1932 he personally received from L. Trotsky instructions
regarding preparations for terroristic acts against the leaders of
the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet government.
Holtzman testifies that he has known Smirnoy since 1918. In
1926 Holtzman joined the Trotskyite organization. Later on he
formally broke with the Trotskyites but continued to meet them,
particularly Smirnov. After a protracted denial of his illegal Trotskyite activities, Holtzman, jn reply to point-blank questions put lo
him by Comrade Vyshinsky, testifies that in ~931 he "accidentally"
met Smirnov in the street. Smirnov proposed to meet him at his
mother's apartment. In 1932 Holtzman came to the rendezvo~.
and told Smimov that he was to be sent abroad on official busi- ~:.-..
ness but that "he was refusing to do this and would go reludanfly."
Smi.rnov advised him to go. Holtzman agreed to accept the commission and to go abroad. Smirnov asked him to visit him once
again before his departure.
The cross-examination of Holtzman and Smirnov establishes
the fact that Smimov preserved particular secrecy about Holb:man, using him fo:r particularly secret missions.
Vyshinsky: I ask you, were you a secret member of the Trotskyite organization acting under the guidance of Smirnov? Do you
before this proletarian Court plead guilty to this or not?
98

Holtzman: Yes.
The State Prosecutor further establishes that the meetings in
the apartment of Smirnov's mother were not accidental and that
this apartment served as the regular meeting,place for- Holtzman
and SmUnov. In establishing the circumstances of the meetings bet"¥eep Holtzman and Sm.iruov in the apa:Ftment of Sm.imO'f"s
mother, Comrade Vyshinsky puts a number of questions to H-Oitz..
man.
Vyshim:ky: So you knew thai at a certain time you would find
Smllmov in his mother's apartment?
Holtzman: Yes.
Vyshinskg: This was Smimov's Trotskyite meeting-plaee'l
Holtzman: As it now appears, yes.
The attused Holizman .fails to disprove the fact that on the
instructior.s of ~he Trotskyite centre he.remained 'Ii eovert Trotskyite within the Party.
Vyshinsky: Formally you were in fue. Patty'!
Holtzman.: 1l'es.
Vy;;himkg: At the same time you were a TrotSkyire?
Holtzman: A Trotskyile.
Vyshinsky: And....
.Holtzman: A COl!Dter•revolutionary.l/yshlnskg: And a dt>uble-dealer"l
Holtzman: .Yes.
·Before his departure from ·the U.S.S.R. Holtzman went to themeeting.place and .met Smirntiv there, Smimov t<~ld ·Holzman
that when in Berlin he was tD meet Trotsky's ron, Sedov. Sminrov
told Holtzman that he .would.give him a reporl .which he was t{'t
deliver to Sedov for Trotzky. As both Holtzman and Si:nimov
admit, this report was to have been handed personally to Sedov
for delivery to Trotsky. Smirnov gave Holtzman a telephone
number b_y wliich he was to ring up Sedov. Smirnov ·then gave
him .the password which was: "I have brought greetings from
r Galya." Further .evidence esta:blishes the fact that ·SIDlimov also.
gave Holtzman a secret code for correspondence with Trotsky-~
for which purpose certain pages from the Arabian Nights were used:.
On arrival in ·Berlin, testifies Holtzman, he telephoned Sedovand arranged to meet' him. The meeting took place near the too...
99

logical Garden. As Holtzman and Sedov did not know each other,
it was agreed that both were to carry in'their hands copies of th,~
Berliner Tageblatt and of the Vorwcirts. On meeting Holtzman,
.
Sedov proposed to go by car.
, Continuing, Holtzman says; "We drove off. l 'don't remember
tl~e' street. Sedov took me to a Oat. No one was there. It was on
the fourth floor. The•e I gave him the report and the secret
code. . . . Thus i met him six or eii;ht times in the course of
foUl' months. In November I again telephoned Sedov and we met
are going to the U.S.S.R, it
once again. Sedov said to me: 'As
would be a good thing if you came with me lo Copenhagen whert!
my father is.' "
Vyshinsky: That is to say?
Holtzman: That is to say, Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: Did you go?
Holtzman: I agreed, but I told him that we could not go together
for reaSO'lls of secrecy. I arranged with Sedov to be in Copenhagen
within two or'three days, to put up at lhe Hotel Brislol and meet
him there. I went to the hotel straight from the station and in the
lounge met Sedov.
About 10 a.m. we went to Trotsky. When we arrived T?°'tsky
first of all asked me about the feelings and the attitude of the mass
of the Pariy members towards Stalin. I told him that I' intended
to leave Copenhagen that day and would leave for the U.S.S.R .
."fithin several days. Then Trotsky, walking up and down ihe room
.in .a rather excited state, told me that he was preparing e letter for
Smim-Ov, hut as I was leaving that day he would not wil'ite it. I .
must say that thrnughout this conversation I was aione with
Trotsky. Very often Trotsky's son Sedov came in and out of !:he
room.
Continuing, Holtzman testifies that in the course of the conversation Trotsky said that it was "necessary to remove Si:alin."
Vyshinsky: What does "remove Stalin" mean? Expfain it
Holtzman: I will speak about that. Then Trotsky said that if
Stalin were :removed, it would be possible for the Troiskyites to
come into power and to the leadership af the C.P.S.U. He also said
that the only means of removing Sta¥n was terrorism.
Vyshinsky: Did Trotsky say that outright?

you

100

Holt:man: Yes. He snia that for this purpose it was necessary
lo choose cadres of responsible people ftl for this task. Then he
said that Jltis was lo be communicated to Smirnov, but I was not
to tell anybody else ubout il
Vyshinsky: Only Smimov?
TIDlt:tmm: Yes. Al that moment Scdov came in and began
hurrying us to finish the conversation. With this our conversation
ended, and I left.
Vyshinsky: So Trols~y plainly told you that the fundamental
task now (that is, in the autumn of 1932) was to assassinate Cem·
rade Stalin? You remember for sure?
·
.Holtzman: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So this was Trotsky's instruction?
Holtzman: Yes. Trotsky could not put it in writing, and so I
accepted it in verbal form and communicated the exact sense of
it on my arrival in Moscow.
Vy1hinsky: That was Trotsky's verbal instruction?
Holtzman: Yes.
Under further examination Holtzman tries to evade responsi·
bility, declaring that he did not share Trotsky's point of view
about terrorism. But the accused is immediately exposed as having
re.mained in the underground Trotzkyite organization and having
continued to meet Trotsk)ites after his return to the U.S.S.R.
Vysl1i11sky: Wt; know that some time later Smirnov received
instructions on· t~rrorism also independently of you. I am exposing
you as having r.eceived these instructions. You knew that the
Trotskyites had already taken up a terroristic position and yet you
continued to remain a Troiskyite?
·
Holt:man: Yes.
·
Vyshinsky: Kept up connections with the Trotskyites?
Holtzman: Yes.
Vyshin~ky: Hence, you continued 'o be a member of the
Trotskyite organization?
f
Holtzman: Yes.

EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED N. LURYE

The accused Nathan Lurye is examined.
He arrived in the U.S.S.R. from Berlin on the special mission
101

of the Trotskyite organization for the purpose of committing terroristic acts. All his Trotskyite activities from 1927 onwards were
directed towards sapping the power of the Soviet state.
Vyshinsky: \Vith wl1om did you first become intimate when
you became a Trotskyite?
N. Lurye: With )loissci Lurye.
Vyshinsky: \\'hen did you become intimate with him?
N. Lurye: At the end of the summer of 1927.
Vyshinsky: \\'hen did your terroristic disposition, intl'ntions,
terroristic plans originate?
N. Lurye: 1he h·aining the Trotskyile organization gave m:!
during all those years which I spent in that organization in GN·
many in the long run reduced itself to rousing haired toward:•
Stalin and the leadership of the C.P.S.U. In the beginning of 1932
Moissei Lurye said to me that it was time to go to the U.S.S.R. and
carry on terroristic work there. This his instruction did not come
as a surprise to me. It logically followed from all the preceding
work. I arrived in the U.S.S.R. in April 1932 with the instruction
to establish connections with the Trolskyiles I had known in
Germany and to carry on terroristic work together with them.
N. Lurye began by establishing connections with the Trotsk~··
ites in Moscow, first of all with those whom be had known in Germany: Konstant and Lipschitz.
N. Lurye: I told Konstant about the terroristic instructions I had
received from the Trotskyite organization through Moissei Lurye.
Konstant told me it was not news to him. They, too, had terroristic
instructions and had even taken practical steps to carry them
out. He told me that they had a terrorist group to which Konstant
and Lipschitz, and also a German engineer-architect, Franz Weitz,
belonged.
Vyshinsky: Who is Franz Weitz?
N. Lurye: Franz Weitz was a member of the National-Socialist
Party of Germany. He arrived in the U.S.S.P.. on the instruetion'i
of Himmler who at that time was chief of the S.S. and subsequent
ly became chief of the Gestapo.
Vyshinsky: Franz Weitz was his representative?
N. Lurye: Franz Weitz arrived in the U.S.S.R. on the instructions of Himmler for the purpose of committing terroristic acts.
102

Vy.•hinsky: Where did you learn this?
N. Lurye: The first one to tell me about it was Konstant, but
later on Franz Weitz himself told me.
The fact that a direct agent of the German political police
stood at the head of the terrorist group did not in the least disturb N. Lurye and his Trotskyite associates.
"I arrived at the conclusion," said N. Lurye, "that since the
Trotskyites had adopted the method of fighting with arms this had
its logic, that is to say, that if a fascist offered his sel'Vices for
the purposes of terrorism, those servict-s should be made use of.
I continued my connections with Fran:z: Weitz and worked under
his practical guidance."
In August 1932 Franz Weitz informed N. Lurye that there was
a possibility of making an attempt on the life of the People's
Commissar of Defence of the U.S.S.li., Comrade Voroshilov. The
terrorist group received instructions from the fascist secret service
agent lo proceed to action. For a long period of time N. Lurye's
group was engaged in preparing the attempt on the life of Comrade Voroshilov.
President of the Court: When you were engaged in preparing
the attempt on the life of Comrade Voroshilov you for a Jong
time watched the coming and going of Comrade Voroshilov's automobile? How long were you engaged i~ preparing for the attempt
on the life of Comrade Voroshilo\' "!
N. Lurye: We were engaged in it from September 1932 to.the
spring of 1933.
President of the Court: Judging by your testimony you frequently went to Frunze Street and to the adjacent streets, armed
with revolvers?
N. Lurye: Yes.
President of the Court: All three of you were armed?
N. Lurye: Yes.
President of the Court: So that you would have committed
the terrodstic act had a favourable moment offered itself? Why
did you not succeed in doing so?
N. Lurye: We saw Voroshilov's car going down Frunze Street.
It was travelling too fast. It was hopeless firing at the fast run-.
ning car. We decided that it was useless.
J:f>8

President of the Court: You managed to see Comrade Voroshilov's car?

N. Lurye: I saw it and so did the second member of the groui~.
Paul Lipschitz.
President of the Court: Did you cease watching Comrade Voroshilov's car?
N. Lurye: Yes.
President of the Court: For what r<-asons?
N. Lurye: Because we became com·inced that it was useleso;
shooting with a revolver.
President of the Court: What did you turn your attention to
after that?
N. Lurye: To the acquisition of explosives.
President of the Court: What kind of terroristic act did you
'intend to commit?
N. Lurye: A terroristic act with a bomb.
President of the Court: You ~id that you turned your attention
to the acquisition of explosives for the purpose of committing a
terroristic act. Against whom?
N. Lurye: Against Voroshilov.
President of the Court: In the street, or on some premises?
N. Lurye: In the street.
In July 1933 N. Lurye was sent to Chelyabinsk to work in the
capacity of a surgeon (his specialityj.
In Chelyabinsk N. Lurye did not cease terroristic activities
and did not abandon his terroristic designs. N. Lurye testifies be·
fore the Court that knowing that Comrades Kaganovich and Orjonikidze were coming to Chelyabinsk, he tried to meet them at the
works and commit a terroristic act against them. He failed l<>.
carry out his intention.
In January 1936 N. Lurye left Chelyabinsk for Leningi;ad on a
scientific mission. Passing through Moscow, he met Moissei Lurye.
who gave him instructions to make an attempt on the life of Comrade Zhdanov.
President of the Court: \\'hat instructions on terrorism did
Moissei Lurye give you in 1934, 1935 and 1936?
N. Lurye: l told him that I intended to make attempts on the
lives of Orjonikid~e and Kaganovich, but later, in January 1936,
Ul4.

he instructed me fo shoot Zhdanov at the First of :May demonstration in Leningrad.
Presidrnt of the Court: You regarded Moissei Lurye as your
leader since you accepted such instructions?
N. Lurye: Yes.
President of the C1>urt: \Vhcn you left for Leningrad, did you
undertake to carry out .'.\I. Lurye·s instructions?
N. Lurye: I knew that I would take part in the First of May
demonstration, and that if it were possible I would try to carry
out these instructions.
President of the Court: Did you take part in the demonstration?
N. Lurye: Yes.
President of the Court: Were you.armed?
N. Lurye: Yes, with a revolver.
President of the Court: "'11ere did you obtain the weapon this
year?
N. Lurye: The weapon remained in Konstant's keeping.
President of the Court: When did you take that weapon?
N. Lurye: In March 1936.
President of the Court: What type of revolver was it?
N. Lurye: A Browning.
President of the Court: What size? Medium?
N. Lurye: Yes.
President of the Court: Did you succeed in getting into the
demonstration to the Uritzky Square?
N. Lurye: Yes~
Pre.~ident of the Court: \Vhy did yon fail to carry out the attempt on the life of Zhdanov?
N. Lurye: We marched by, too far a way.
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED M. LURYE
In reply to the President, M. Lurye declares that he fully confirms the evidence he gave at the preliminary investigation.
Vysh.i11sky: Accused Lurye, tell me, please, what concrete steps
did you take in your terroristic activity?
M. Lurye: On leaving Berlin for l\foscow on March 4, 1933, I
received definite instructions. I received these instructions from
Ruth Fischer and Maslov, but actually they were the instructions of
Trotsky himself. I had been connected wilh Ruth Piscl1er sinc-.e
105

1924, and in opposition work in the Zinoviev faction had been
<·onnected with her since October 1925. I had been connected with
Maslov since 1927 when l returned to Berlin from Moscow. The inthe opinstructions were of the following character: Trotsky is
ion and fosists, and we, that is to say, Maslov and Ruth Fischer, are
in agreement wil!h Trotsky's instruction lo the effect that it is fl(.-Cessary to speed up the organization of terroristic acts against the
leaders of the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet government, in the first
place against Stalin. I received these instructions personally in verbal form from Ruth Fischer and Maslo\· on .March 4, 1933, as I
have already said.
Vyshinsky: I am waiting for your statement on the practical
steps Y.OU took in this direction.
M. Lurye: On arriving in Moscow on March 9, 19~3, I communicated this verbal instruction at its destination, n'1mely, to Zinoviev's former personal emissary in Berlin, A. V. Herz.berg. 1 was
connected with Herzberg in Zinovievite work from November
1927 until his departure for Moscow at the end of 1931. I communicated this instruction not later than the middle of April. Herzberg accepted the instruction iand said that this instruction from
Trotsky, Ruth Fischer and Maslov was fully in accord with identical decisions already adopted by our centre in the U.S.S.R.
In reply to questions put to him by the State Prosecutor about
the practical steps the accused had taken to organize terroristic
acts, M. Lurye related about his three meetings with Zinoviev. During one of th~se meetings which took place in Zinoviev's apartment
in the beginning of August 1934, Lurye gave Zinoviev detailed information about Trotsky's instructions received thi-ough Ruth
Fischer and Maslov concerning the preparation of terroristic act!>,
and in particular, eoncerning the activities of the group of his namesake, Nathan Lurye.
Vyshinskg: Tell me please, were you connected with Nathan
Lurye?
M. Lurye: Yes. I was connected with Nathan Lurye approximately from April 1933 fo January 2, 1936.
Vyshinskg: You knew Nathan Lurye as a member of the underground Trotskyite organization?
M. Lurye: Certainly.
106

of

Vyshinskg: You: knew lhal: at that period Nathan LlH'ye was
engaged in preparing a number of terroristic ads?
M. Lurye: Quite true.
M. Lurye then goes on to relate how he organized the attempt
on the life of Comrade Orjonikidze. This terroristic act was l:-0 have
been committed whlJe Comrade Orjonil;;i~e was at fue Chelyabinsk
Tractor Works. For t.i.'1.is purpose M. Lurye had instructed N. Lurye,
who was going to fae Chelyabinsk Tracior Works, to take the
opportunity of a possible visit to the works by Com:mde Orjonikidze to comm.it a terroristic act against him.
Vyshinsky: In what other measures for com..."Uitting terro!l'istic
acts did ·you participate?
iii. Lurye: 1 took part in preparing an attempt -on the life of
Zhdanov.
The accused relates in detail how on .January 2, 1936, he
commwlieated to Nathan Lurye -definite instructions to organize
a terroristic act against Comrade Zhdanov~ and promised to give
hlm later addresses and connect him with Zaidel's terrorist group
in Leningrad.
Comrade Vyshinsky then asks M. Lurye whet.lier he was anything to add to his evidence.
M. Lurye: I can add something to Nathan Lurye's testimony and
about my important conversation with Zinoviev concerning Weitz's
group. Nathan Lurye informed me concretely of the work of tlre
terrorist group organized 'by Weitz. Noting my perplexity when
I heard aibout tl>Js sort of a:liy, N. Lurye a~ecl me what l
thought about it. I replied that my personal attitude played no
role here, that I would immediately repori. H in proper quarters,
and said to N. Lurye: if you c!.o not receive a reply in the negative, this
will mean that you are working with the knowle-'..,ge of the .:entre.
Vyshinsky: ·whom personally <lid you have in mind?
M. Lu.r.y_e: I had contacts with A. V. Herzberg, a peFson enjoying the partieular confidence of Zinoiviev. N. Lurye did not receive a
#i-eply in the negative from me. From the time of my conversation
with him in April 1933 NaLilan Lurye's group, which was organized by the fascist Franz Weitz, wot."ked with the knowJedge and
indisputably with the consent of the centre, and of Zinoviev
personally.
l07

Vyshinsky: Consequently, you admit tha~ for a consY.lerable
number of years you were a member of the underground Trotskyite
organization?
M. Lurye: Yes, I fully admit it.
Vyshinsky: That organization pursued terroristic aims?
M. Lurye: I admit that I brought such instructions.
Vyshinsky: You con{irm that you received instructiOlllS on
terrorism from Trotsky through Ruth Fischer and Maslov and
communicated them to Zinoviev?
M. Lurye: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You know that the instructions were communicated?
M. Lurye. Quite definitely.
Vyshinsky: Were you connected with Nathan Lurye's group and
simultaneously with the fascist agent Franz \Veitz?
M. Lurye: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you in conjunction with i\'athan Lurye prepare
a number of attempts at assassination, and did you give the
instructions to prepare the attempt on the life of Comrade
Stalin?
M. Lurye: I did not take part in the preparations, but I communicated instructions about the attempt.
llyshinsky: You gave instructions to prepare attempts on the
lives of Orjonikidze and Zhdanov, and you not orily gave instrucc
lions, but indicated the contacts?
M. Lurye: Yes, I told Nathan Lurye that he would be given
an address later.

EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED TER-VAGANYAN
The Court proceeds to the examination of the accused TerVaganyan.
In reply to questions put to him by Comrade Vyshinsky the
accused Ter-Vaganyan admits that he was one of the organizers
of the 'J;'rotskyite-Zinovievite centre, and also that this centr.e was
organized on the basis of Trotsky's instructions on terrorism.
Vyshinsky: The instructions were communicated in good time
to you as one of the organizers?
Ter-Vaganyan: Yes.
108

Vyshinsky: You admit that you personally also took part in
preparing certain terroristic acts?
Ter-Vaganyan: I did not take part in preparing terroristic acts,
but I did take part in the work of the centre.
Vyshinsky: You took part in terroristic work?
Ter-Vaganyan: All the work was terroristic.
Vyshinsky: During your examination on August 14 you said:
"Of the persons belonging to the united Trotskyite-Zinovievite
centre, about which I sp0ke in detail in my testimony on ·July 16
this year, I. N. Smirnov, Mrachkovsky, Ziuoviev and Kamenev
guided the practical organization and training of the terrorist
group"-do you confirm that?
Ter-Vaganyan: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you added: "Personally I worked under the
instructions of Smirnov and Kamenev"--do you confirm that?
Ter-Vaganyan: Yes.
Vgshinsky: In 1931 was Smirnov disposed towards violent
methods <?f struggle?
Ter-Vagangan: Yes, as were all the Trotskyites surrounding
Smirnov.
Continuing his testimony, Ter-Vaganyai1, speaking of .his return to Moscow from Transcaucasia, confirms the testimony
of the witness Safonov:;i. to the. effect that she, Safonova, had informed Ter-Vag_anyan ahout Smirnov's journey abroad and his
meeting with L. Sedov.
"I must say," testifies Ter-Vaganyan, "that there was no talk
all about these instructions regarding terrorism being the personal opinion of Sedov. Had Safonova told me that this was Scdov's
personal opinion, she and I would have laughed at it as a joke.
When Smirnov returned, he repeated his stoi-y to me and Safonova."
Reply.jog
Comrade Vyshinsky's question as to the reasons
why Smirnov denies this, Ter-Vaganyan explains to the Court that
Smirnov is afraid of telling the court the whole truth because he
would then have to name a number of persons who were as.~atcd
with terrorism. In particular, says Ter-Vaganyan, Smimov does
not want to say that beginning with 192.'S i1e maintllined systematic connections with Gruzian deviationists. When Smirnov n.'109

at

to

turned from abroad, ill 1932, he met the Gruzian deviatlonists.
whose attitude, as is well known, was terroristic from 1928 onwards.
Vyshinsky: Smirnov, you confirm that you were connected with
the Gruzian deviationists?
Smirnov: In 1929 I met -Okudjava.
Vyshinsky (to Ter-Vaganyan): When did the Stiickgold groupexist?

Further examination of Ter-Vaganyan throws light on I. N.
Smimov's connectioas with the Stiickgold terrorist group. Te:rVaganyaB says:
"l was mtro<,iuced to Stiick,gold by I. N. Smimov in 1929. Smirnov asked me receive Stiickgold whenever .he would anive. He did
not want Stiickgold to see anyune else. Such secrecy could only have
OD!! meaning, aamely that Stiickgold had some kind of special connections which had to he safeguarded"
.
In reply to a. question pnt to him by Comrade Vyshinsky I. N.
Smirnov denies that he introduced Stiickgold to Ter-Vaganyan
and that he visited the latter's apartment with him. However,
on being proved wrong by Ter-Vaganyan, he has to admit that such
a meeting may have taken place.
Vyshinsky (to Smimov): You aemit that you may have visited
Ter- Vag:;i.nyan with Stiickgold?
Smil'nt:W: I .do as regarqs 1929.
Vyshinsky: So in 1929 you, T.er-Vaganyan and Stiickgold did
meet?
Smirnov: Possibly.
Ter-Vaganyan (to Smir:aov) : That was in the winter of 1929-30?
Smirnov: Yes.
:2··
Vys/lil!sky (to Ter-Vaganyan): The Stii.ckgold group was a .teirorist gro11p?
Ter-Vaganyan: Yes, it was terrorist.
"In the autum,n of 1931," continues Ter-Vaganyan, "my very
close connection and friendship with Lominadze began. I met Lominadze frequently, and on these occasions we talked about a bloc."
Continuing Tris testimony, Ter-Vaganyan says that at that period the Trotskyites began negotiations for union with the Zinovievites and the "Leftists," and that the terroristic stand was perfectly clear.

uo

V9ahindcg: When was that?
Ter-Vaganyan: After Smimov came back from Berlin.
Vyahinaky: At that period was the terroristic stand clear?
Ter-Vaganyan: Yes, it was clear, because the instructions bad
already been brought.
In clarifying the question as to the basis on which the bloc wilh
the "Leftists" .was formed, Comrade Vyshinsky puts .a number of
questions·to the accused Smirnov. Smirnov's replies make it clear
that the bloc was formed on a terroristic basis.
Vgshinsky (to Smimov): Did you organize the bloc or not?
Smirnov: I instructed Ter-Vaganyan to negotiate with Lominadze.
Vyshinslcy: What for?
'Smirnov: For a union.
Vgshinskg: Did the union take place?
Smirnov: Yes.
Vgshinslcg: With the "Leftists"?
Smirnoo: Yes.
"Vgahinsky: Did you join the bloc~
Smirnov: Yes.
Vgshinsky: At that time the instructions regarding terrorism
were in operation?

·smirnov: Yes.
In reply to Comrarle Vyshinsky's question as to his personal
terroristic activities, Ter-Vaganyan stresses the point that he carried on terroristic work under the guidance of Smirnov and Kamenev. In particular, he discussed the question of terrorism with
the Trotskyites, Za;idel and Friedland. "In 1932," says Ter-Vaganyan, "I met Friedland and told him that it was now necessary to
adopt violent forms of struggle against the Party. In reply to his
question as to the meaning of violent forms of struggle, I said: you
are not a child-violent forms of struggle are terroristic forms of
struggle. ·That is clear."
By a number of questions Comrade Vyshinsky clarifies the
relations between Ter-Vaganyan and Friedland in terroristic activities. The replies af Ter-Vaganyan make it clear that
Ter-Vaganyan gave Friedland instructions regarding the organization of terroristic acts.
111

AUGUST 21 (EVENING SESSION)
EXAMINATION OF THE ACCUSED FRITZ DAVID
(KRUGLYANSKY)
At the evening sessi<m of August 21, the last of the accused.
Fritz David (Krnglyansky), is examined.
Fritz David was sent to the Soviet Union by Trotsky as a terrorist with instructions to make an attempt on the life of Comrade
Stalin. In reply to a question put to him by the President of the
Court the accused confirms his testimony as to the instructions
he received personally from Trotsky in Copenhagen. In grder not
to expose the underground Trotskyite organization to any risk,
Fritz David did not establish contact with anybody in the U.S.S.R.
except with Berman-Yurin. This, declares the accused, was in
pursuance of ihe direct instructions of Trotsky.
Replying to questions . put to him by Comraae Vyshinsky,
Fritz David gives to the Coli.rt a detailed acoount of how in August
1932 he established contact with Sedov, and, through the latter,
with Trotsky.
Vyshinskg: When did you meet Trotsky?
Fritz David: I met him .at the end of November 1932.
Vyshinsky: How did you come to him?
Fritz David: I travelled on a false passport. In one of the conversations I had with Sedov he told me that Trotsky was to come
to Europe and would like to see rue.
Vyshinsky: Tell me, during that meeting with Trotsky, was
there talk of terrorism?
Fritz David: There was.
Vyshinsky: On whose initiative'!
Fritz David: On Trotsky's initiative.
In his testimony regarding the content of his conversati-0n with
Trot.sky, Fritz David declares that Trotsky said that the advent
112

-of the Trotskyites to power in the U.S.S.R. was possible ori.ly if
Stalin were physically destroyed
One of ilhe prospects put forward by Trotsky was to take a
defeatist attitude in the event of war, but he stressed the pDint that
"fill.ere is a closer prospect of the Trotskyites coming to power.the. prospect of the physical removal of Stalin."
Vyshinsky: Wilat was your attitude toward this ~?
Fritz David: I accepted this second prospect.
Vyshinksy: Did you teii hlm so-that you a:ccepte!d thls fo:i.e,
that you agreed?
Fritz David: Yes.
Vyshinski;: What else occurred?
Fritz David: Then Tmtsky gave me two instructions. Th:e fi.U'St
instruction concen;.ed secrecy.
Vyshinsky: You told him you would undertake a teIToristie
mission?
Fritz David: Yes. He propmed ilhat I go to the U.S.S.R. a'1d.
personally comm.it a terroristic act, without the aid of ·omen,
without any organization, without contacts with olliei!" Tiotsk.y.ites.
Vyshinsky: And ihai is what the instruciion concerning sae;f'e·
-:.y amounted to?
Fritz David: Yes. Trotsky told me that this affair- invo1vsii mm
and ihat ihe!'."e was no point in exposiDg the Trotskyitc m:·gan..
izs.tion in the U.S.S.R. to fuat risk. The second ins~ was
to the effect that this terroristic. aiet was to hear an mterns.tion·
.al character, wa.S to he committed at an inier~atio:!:tl assembi.y.
Tbi5 shot, as Trntsky expressed it, was to reverilerate furO'l~OOt
.the whole world.
Vyshinsky: Did your conversation erui at that?
Fritz David: Our conversation, which was a very i.ong one.
-ende-4. at that. Besii<les, Trotsky sWrl, for example, ilili"! Wlk
.about individooJ terror not being oompatible. with Msl!'l'.:ism W:.ll! a
iubject for the Philistines of Marxism.
Vyshinsky: 'i.!Vb:at ol!h-er instruictions did Trotsky ghre yoo't
Fritz David: Trntsky instructed me to behave in the U.S.S.ii\.
in such a way a-s not to show any deviations from the gell:!eral fune
<>f the, Party, and when writing for the press to adhere strictly

us

to the Party line; and under no cireumstances to reveal the
threads after the terroristic act was committed.
Fritz David arrived in the U.S.S.R. in March 1933 and met
.Bermau-Yurin who sought him out on Sedov's instructions. Fritz
David.and Berman-Yurin drew up two concrete plans for attempt..
on the life of Comrade Stalin; the first was to be made at the·
Thirteenth Plenum of the E.C.C.I., the second at the Seventh
Congress of the. Comintern. Both plans failed, because Com·
mde Stalin did not attend the Thirteenth Plenum, While only
Fritz David was able to get into the Congress of the Cominten1,
since he had failed to obtain a licket for Berman-Yurin. Fritz.
:David, according to his statement, was unable to commit the terroristic act ·because it was impossible to get · near Comrade
Stalin.
Vyshinsky: So you gained entry to the Congress?
Fritz David: Yes, I was at the Congress.
Vyshinsky: Why. was the terroristic act not committed?
fritz .David: The indictment quite correctly states that I. was
npt :able to get near Stalin.
Vyshinsky: You went to the Congress to make an attempt at
assassination?
Fritz David: Of course.
After ·the Seventh Con·gress ·messengers .from Trotsky's son,
Seduv, ·visited Fritz David on two occasionll, and in Sedov's name
aecused the terrorists of not being· sufficiently active and ordered
them, to· speed up the terroristic act in accordance with Trotsky's
mstructionS;
Vyshirisky: These meetings took pla:ce on the basis of your
terroristic plans?
Fritz David: These meetings were caused by the fact that the
terroristic act was ru>t committed at the Seventh Congress, and
this made Bedov furious.
Vyshinsky: But did your terroristic disposition pass away after
this, or did it continue until quite recently?
Fritz David: Yes, it continued.
Vyshinsky: Until when?
Fritz David: Until my arrest.
Vyshin.,ky: So we may sum up. You were a member of the
11!

Trotskyite orgaru:i:ation and mcl Trctsky personally. Trotsky personally commissioned you to go to fue U.S.S.R. to commit G terroristic act and warned you io observe st.-ict secrecy; That explains
Why you rnaide no contacts wi'l!h mny ot_h.er :memlbers of the Trotskyite organization ex:repi Berman-Yurin. Together with BetmanYurin, who had received anai.ogous instructions, you made preparations for an attempt on the life of Comrade Stalin, timing it
for the Seventh Cong;ress fo 1935 .. Thanks to the contacts you had
in the Comintern you peI"sonally gained entry to the Congress irt
order to commit this ad, but you failed to <1o so owing to circumstances over which you had nc control.
Fritz David: I question this last point somewhat, not in orde.r
to minimize my guilt, but simply to p<"esen.t fue whole picture.
Vysh.insky.· Then let's s:oy: owing to objective circumstan~es?
Fritz David: Owing to objective and subjective factors.
Vyshinsky: But you will not deny the charge against you that
you failed io commit the {\Ci ·bet:aUSe you could not get n~rer to the
platform and had
dh.ance fo .get near Comrade Stalin?
Fritz David: That was one of the reasons:
_Vyshinsky: Yes, one of the reasons, but an obvious, objective
reason. All the rest is mere psychol.cgy.
This concludes the examination of the accused Fritz David.

no

STATEMENT BY COMRADE V'l!SHXNSKY, STATE ATTORNEY
OF THE U.S.S.R.
After the examination of fae accused at the evening session of
Augusi 21, Ccm...--ade Vysihii-isky, Staie Attorney of the U.S.S.R.
makes ihe foUowing istatement:
"At preceding sessions some of foe accused (Kamenev, Zinoviev
and Reingo1d) in their testirro...ony retferroo to Tom.sky, Bukharin,
Rykov, Ugfanov, Radek, Pyatakov, Serebryakov and Sokolnikov
as being to a gre:;;.ier or lesser degrel'! involved in the criminal
lounter-<evoluUonary activities fo;- which the accused i..-i the pres. ent case a:re being tried. I consider it necessru:y ..to inform the
Court that yesterday I gave orders to institute an inve~tigaiion
of these statements of ~he a;Ccused in rega1'd i:<> Tomsky, Rykov,
Bukharin, Uglanov, R.adek and Pyatakov, a.1<l that li1 accordance
with the results of this investiga'ii00i fue office of .fue State Attorney
115

will institute legal proceedings in this matter. Jn regard to Sercbryakov and Sokolnikov, the investigating authorities are already
in possession of material convicting these persons of counter-revolutionary crimes, ·and:, in view of this, criminal proceedings are
being instituted agamst Sokolnikov and Serebryakov."

*

*

At the end of the evening session of August 21, the accused
Dreitzer, replying to questions put to him by Comrade Vyshinsky
concerning certain details of the counter-revolutionary activities of
the Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre, declares that one of the active
par..icipants in the terroristic work of the Trotskyites was Putna,
:m old mid active Trotskyite. According to Dreitzer, P.utna at one
time ostensibly left the Trotskyites in pursuance of the line of
dotlhle-dealing, but a;ctually conHnuOO. until quite recently to oo.rry
on strktly secret work for. the Trotskyite centre. Iu particular,
Dreitzer testifies that ·Putna had direct contact with Trots..1'.y,
met I. N. Smirnov, and in 1932 communicated to Smirriov, through
Dreitzer, Trotsky's verbal instructions to organize terrorist groups.
The aooused Smirnov tries to deny the fad that Putna participated
in the terroristic activity of the Ti:otskyites. However, in reply to
questions put to them by Comrade Vyshinsky, the accused Pickel,
Reingold aoo Bakayev corroborate Dreitzer's testimony.
On the conclusion of the examination of fhe accused, .Comrade
Ulrich, President of the Court, declares the court investigation
ended.

l lfl

AUGUST 22 (MORNING SESSION)
The President of t.'iie Court grants leave to the State Prosecutor,
Comrade A. Y. Vyshinsky, State Attorney of the U.S.S.R., to address the Court.
SPEECH FOR THE PROSECUTION
Vyshinski: Comrades judges, comradeii members of the Militazy
Collegium of the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union: For three days
you have very carefully and with the greatest attention exlimiried
the evidence and proof submitted to you by the State Prosecution
against the people sitting here in the dock charged with having
committed the gravest crimes against the state. With the grea'iest
possible care you have subjected tci investigation and judicial
scrutiny every one of these proofs, every fact, every event, every
step 1aken by the ,accused, who in the course _of many years added
crime to crime in their struggle against the Soviet state, against
the Soviet power, against our Party and against the whole of our
Soviet people.
Horrible and monstrous is the chain of these crimes against
our sociaHst fatherland; and each one of these crimes dererves
the severest.condemnation and severest punishment. Horrible and
monstrous is the guilt of these criminals and murderers, who
raised their hand against the leaders of our· Party, against Comrades Stalin, Voroshilov, Zhdanov, Kaganovich, ·Orjonikidze, Kossior and Postyshev, against our leaders, the leaders of the·Soviet
state. Monstrous are the crimes perpetrated by this gang which
not only made preparations to cominit terroristic acts, but actually
murdered one of the best sons of the working "class, one of the
most devoted to the cause of socialism, one of the most. beloved
117

disciples of the great Stalin, the fiery tribune of the proletarian
revolution, the unforgettable Sergei Mironovich Kirov.
But monstrous as these crimes are, and however profoundly
we may have been stirred and digusted by this nightmare of horrible crime, you, comrades judges, ais befits a Soviet court and Soviet
justice, have been weighing and appraising very calmly the facts
which came before you in connection with the criminal activities of
these persons whose names have long ago been covered with con&mpt and disgrace 'in the eyes of the whole people.
We nave now come to the end of our j~dicial proceedings. We
are making the final summary. \Ve are drawing our last deductions
1n preparation, within a few hours, perhaps, to hear your verdict,
the vtrdict of the Court of the land.of Soviets which demands
and expects from you a just,. unfaHering and implacably stern
decision concerning th~ fate of these people, these contemptible
murderers, these vile and fosolent enemies of file land of Soviets,
of the Soviet people.
We are building a new, socialist society, a new, Soviet state,
under the difficult conditions of class struggle, amidst the fierce
resistance of the last rertm~nts of the exploiting classes which
we have routed and utterly crushed.
Every step in our progress is ·accompanied by desperate re•
sistance on the part of om.· enemies who rouse against us all the
forces -illf the old world,.· all the filth, all the scum of the old society, who mobilize and furow into the struggle against us the
most criminal, the most hardened, the most incorrigible, decayed
and dishonest elements.
Lenin taught us that "there has ·never been a single deep and
mighty popular movement in history without filthy scum,"* wilhc
-011t the bourgeois and· petty-bourgeois element fighting against the
Soviet Government, and resorting not only to the methods of the
Savinkovs, the Gotzes, the Gegechkoris and Kornilovs, of plots
and rebellions, of floods of lies and slander, but also utilizing all the
elements of decay, and embarking upon every possible sordid and
shameful crime.
Comrade Stalin wamed us that:
. *·Lenin, Collected Works, Vol, XXII, p. 457, Ru~s\an edition, "Immediate
Trutks of tlie Soviet Government."
118

"We must bear in mind that the growth of the power of the
Soviet state will increase the resistance of the last remnants of the
dying classes. It is precisely because they are dying, and ·Iinng
their last days that they will pass from one form of attack to an-0ther, to sharper forms of attack, appealing to the backward strn.ta:
of .the population, and mobilizing them against the Soviet power.·
There is no foul lie or slander that these 'ihave-heens' .would not
use against the Soviet power and around which they. would: not.
fry to mobillize the backward elements. This may give gromid for:
the revival of the activities -0f the 'defeated groups of· the. :old
coupter-revolutionary parties: the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the
Mensheviks, "the bourgeois natiollalists in the .centre and in the out•:
lying regions; it may give grounds also for the revival of the
~ctivi.ties of the fragments of counter-revolutionary opposition elements from among the Trotskyites and the Right dc'ldationists. Of
course, there is nothing terrible in this. But we· must bear all this
in mind if. we want to put an end to these elements quicklly
without great loss."*
Three years ago Comrade Stalin not only foretold the inevitable
resistance of elements hostile to .the cause of socialism, but also
foretold the possibility of the rerival ~f Trotskyite counter-revolu- ·
tionary groups. This trial has fully and distinctly proved the. great
wisdom of this foreeast.
The "heroes" .of this trial have linked their fate· with tlfe
fascists, with the agents of secret-police departments; these "heroes" have lost all scruples and gone to the uttermost limits of
.duplicity and deceit, -elevated perfidy and treachery to a system,
.to the law of their struggle against the Soviet state.
This trial has completely revealed and has once again proved
how great and boundless is the rage and hatred of our enemies
toward the great cause of socialism; this trial has shown how insignificant are"these enemies who rushed headlong from one crime
to anoth~r. A contemptible, insignificant, impotent group of trai~
tors and murderers thought that by means of .their sordid crimes
they could cause the heart of our great people to cease to beat!'
This contemptible, insignificant group of adventurel"S tried with

and

• Stalin, The Resulta of the Firat Fi'ff-Yetu Plan, end of Section VU.

1'J9

their mud-stained feet to trample upon the most fragrant flo\\'ers
in our socialist garden.
These mad dogs of capitalism tried to tear !limb from limb the
best of the best of our Soviet land. They killed one of the men of
the revolution who was most dear to us, that admirable and wonderful man, bright and joyous as the smile on his lips was always
bright and joyous, as our new life is bright and joyous. Thy killed
our Kirov; they wounded us cl-Ose to our very heart. They thought
they could sow coQfusion-and consternation in our ranks.
To the· murderers' treacherous shot of Deeember l, 1934, the
whole country replied with unanimous execration. The whole country, millions and tens of millions of people, were aroused and once
again proved their solidarity, their unity, their loyalty to the great
banner of the Party of Lenin-Stalin. The land of Soviets rose up
like an unshakable, iron wall in defense of its leaders, its
guides, for -every hair of whose heads these criniinal madmen
will answer with their lives. In this boundless· 1ove of millions of
toilers for our Party, for its Central Committee, and for our Stalin
and his glorious comrades-in-arms, in this infinite love of the
people lies the strength of the defence and protection of our leaders, the guides of our country and Party, against traitors, murderers and bandits.
Our great fatherland is joyously flourishing and growing.
The fields of innumerable collective farms are rich with a golden
harvest. Thousands of new socialist, Stakhanov factories and
works are pulsating with life. Harmoniously and wonderfully ourrailways are working for the welfare of our fatherland, and from
end to end of the country Krivonoss passenger and freight trains
are speeding over the glistening ribbons of steel. Firm as granite
stands our Red Army, surrounded with the love of the people.
guarding the frontiers of our native land. The names of our·wonderful Bolsheviks, the tireless and gifted builders of our state-Sergo Orjonikidze, Klim Voroshilov, Lazar M'oisseyevich Kaganovich, the leaders of the Ukrainian Bolsheviks-:-Kossior and Postysltev, and the leader of the Leningrad Bolsheviks, Zhdanov,
are near and dear to the hearts of us and all those who are tilled
with filial love for their motherland. With great and unsurpassed
love, the toilers of the whole world utter the name of the
120

great teacher and leader of the peoples of the U.S.S.R.-Joseph
V:assarionovich Stalin!
Under the leadership of the Soviet government and our Party.
headed by· Stalin, socialism has finally and irrevQCably triumphed
in our country. Under the leadership of our Party the proletariat
of our country took the implements and means of production from
the capitalists, abolished the capitalist system which is based on
private property, on exploitation, on poverty and slavery.
Undt:r the leadership ot our Party and the Soviet government
the peoples of the U.S.S.R. brought about the great industrialization
af our country, increased its means cf pr-0duciion tenfold, multi•
plied its na,tional wealth and thereby created the conditions for a
happy and joyous life for all the toilers of the Soviet land of socialism. The victory of socialism is first and foremost the victory
of our own Bolshevik Party, of its Leninist-Stalinist general line,
of its Leninist-Stalinist leadership, of its Central Co:mniittee, headed
by the great Stalin.
On the basis of these victories there has been created ilie indestructible union of all the toilers for the further reinforcement
and development of socialism; there has been created and ceme.nted
the union and friendship of all the peoples of the U.S.S.R. for the
building of liOcialism, for defence against our enemies, against the
enemies of socialism. These victories have completely changed the
!!ntire face of our country, which has been raised to an unprecedented level of economic and cultural development.
These victories have brought the working class of the U.S.S.R.
~normous improvement in their material well-being. It is now
many years since unemployment has been eliminated and the
seven-hour day, against which the "heroes" now in the dock always
persistently and treacherously fought, has been introduced. Our
country has achieved unprecedented successes, impossible in any
capitalist country, in developing a new, re81ly human, socialist
culture. ·.
I

every

These victories have brought our whole country,
factory
worker and collective farmer, every office worker and intellectual;
the gumuitee
a happy and a weU-iO;.do life. And these vietories
of the unity of all the Soviet people Wiith. ·om- government, with
our Party and with its Central Committee. Are not the wid~

are

iii

Jila8$, popJJlar ronferences..·c~nceivable only in our· country, of the
leading people of our factories and works, of our transport systenii
~f our. :fA:ltf9n '.and. sugar, beet fields, of live"stock breeders, of
~o.iµbiJW and .tractor. .drivers, Qf Stajtlianovites and Krivonossites
with iji(I Jea.ders. of the .party and the government .the best proof
qf. ~ md~tmctible, genuine unity and solidarity of the masses
~f::tbt people .with- the ~eat Stalin, with our Central Committee,.
with our S9:viet government? This is a manifestation of genuine
Sfwjet, tru~· d~oeracyl And is not the mighty wave of popular
wi:at)l, J10:W s:w~ing. from one end of the· country to the other
~~ .. :Ql~ .~icaible ~ers, a. striking evidence of tills
lJJlity?

· ·· Th~ TrotskyitecZinovievite Centre-.4 ··Gang of Contemptible
· ·
' T~iro_rists
· ·:
:Durillg _.out prece<Ung d;tys of the tr~ fu.ese gentlemen tried

to ~irike a "noble" ·attitud.e. They, or at all events their leadl'lrs,

s_pa~e ~ut their .teri:oristic plot with a certai~ pq~e; they ~:uglit
~d expected a

political evaluation, of their !!rh:µes,. they. talked
8J>out poliii.c8J. struggle, · abou£ SQme kind o~ political agreeliien!s _w~th' sm:n~· kill~ or' a,nei~d, poliijc:µ piµifos. i\Jld .~lJl()u_gh
th~y admitted tJiat in reality they had D() political pll:ttforlJh that
they diq n~t ev~ feel, the need to draw up. a political pJatfol'ID.
J;Jecause, _on . t?eif." _-0wn admission, their platforIJ1 C4;1µld be. written
at one sitting, ~- a couple of hours, ,nevertheless, they tried to pose,
as g~n-qine politjcal figllres. _They_ do all they ,canto mak~ it appear
that. they are s~ding on. some political position, bespattered and
bat;fered, perhaps,: but po~tical none the less.. These etrorts are
:\Der~ly_ a false screen to conceal their political emptinei;s and lack
of principle. And when they spoke about the interests of the
workb;tg c:J.a:ss, about the uiterests of the people, when they
spe:ik about th~, in their speeches in their defence and in their
last pleas, they will ilii.e as they have lied hitherto, as they.
are lying now1 for they ~!)1,18ht.against the, ~~Y people'.s popcy,
against the· policy _of our. cow.iUy-. ag!liJlst qur ..Soviet policy~ ~ilJE.s
4!ncLclo'!na• ilisi~i ~~. . littlt! , 4Qgs . ~rljng. at an

wm

41lepJlut. -~ • wh4t tlhi& gaµg represe~~!
&t•tbey•knOlV Jw.w lQ Ulie ~. an(\ tliJlrll~ l,i~ ~ ~ger. t()
. lit

society. This makes it necessary to adopt special and most 5eVft:t!
measures against them. To chain them is not enough. We muit
adopt more determ1ned and radical measures against them. Not
political figures, but a gang of murderers and crb:nins}s, thievest
who tried to rob the state, this is what this gang represents!
These gentlemen admitted that they had no program; buHhey
<lid have some sort of a "program." They had a program both in
home and foreign policy. In tlheir home policy theii progiram.,oould
be put jn one WTOrd-to murder. It is true that they·prefer to ~:k
not of murder but of terror. But we must call things by theiJ',pJ:QPer
names. These gentlemen chose murder as a mea."LS of fightiµg J~r
power. They were compelled to admit this here the!Jlseives, cynically and openiy.
How did these gentlemen reconcile their aUeged M&rn~-m. with
the preaching of terror and terroristic activity? In n.o wise! AD.d
yet these people called themselves Marxists at oDe time! Probably
the accused Zinoviev still considers himself a Maui.st. He said here
that Marxism could not be reconciled with terrorism; b:ut Mandsm
oitn explain how they came to terrorism,.
During this trial I asked the accused Reiuigold how they re-conciled Marxism wifu the preaching of terroll' and terroristic
activitie~, and he said: "In 1932, Zinoviev, in Kamenev's apartment, ·in the presence of a number of members 9f the illnited fut·
skyite-Zinovievite centre, argued in favour of ri;sortmg to te::ror
.as follows: aithou~h terror is L"lcompatibie wiiLli Marxism, at ~
present moment· these considerations must he abandoned. There
.are no other methods available of fighting the leaders of the
Party and the government at the present time, Stalin combines in
himself i!ill the strength. and firmness of the Party leader&hip;
Therefore Sl:alin must be put out ofthe way in the first place." 1!ere
you have a reply, frankly cynical, insolent, but absQllutely logical.
Here you harve :the sum and suhs•tance of Zinoviev's "pl!Ros.ophy of tbe epoch."
Reingold said: "Kamenev enlarged on thiS ·theory and said that
the former methods of fighiling, namely, attempts to win
mfl.~S.
combinations with the leaders of the Rightists, w::...Q bankmg on economic difficulties, have feJied. T'.n~t is why me only met.Md of
struggle·available is terroris!p, l-e~isli~ acts ~a.inst Sttl!ill and his

tile

ua

closest comrades-in-arms, Voroshilov, Kaganovich, Orjonikidze.
Kossior, Postyshev and Zhdanov."
This is frank and insolent, Lut at the same time it is logical
from the point of view of the logic of the class struggle, from the
point of view of the logic of our enemy who is fighting against the
land of socialism.
Without the masses, against the masses, but for power, power
at all costs, thirst for persenal power-this is the whole ideology
of the gang that is now in the dock.
The whole cynical unprincipledness of these people was frankly avowed here by Kamenev. In his explanations before the court
he stated how and ~n what basis this terroristic conspiracy, as he
called it, was organized.
Kamenev said: "I became convinced that the policy of the
Party, the policy of its leadership, had been victorious in the only
sense ~ which the political victory in the land of socialism is possible, that this policy was recognized iby the masses of the tOilers.~·
This statement is remarkable for its lack of principle and for
its' insolent cynicism; just because "the policy of the Party had
been victorious," they fought against its leaders,
Kamenev said: "Our banking on the possibility of a split in
the Party also proved groundless. Two paths remained: either
honestly and completely to put a stop to the struggle against the
Party, or to continue this struggle,- but without any hope of obtaining any mass support whatsoever, without a political platform,
without a banner, that is to say, by means of individual terror. We
chose the second path."
The accused Kamenev should have been more consistent: if
he called the first path the path of honest renunciation of t!he struggle, then he should have called the second path the path of dishonest struggle with dishonest weaporui.
He admitted: '"We chose this second path. In this we were
guided by our b()undless hatred of the leaders of the Party and the
country•. and by a thirst for power, with which we were onoe close·
ly associated and from which we were cast 'aside by the course of
historical development."
The accwed Zinoviev said: "At the end of 1932 it became evident that our hopes had proved. false •.. the fact was that the
124

general line of the Party was winning." "Here,"· said Zinoviev,
"the complete lack of principle and ideals which brought us to the
hare and unprincipled struggle for power became strikingly apparent." (Vol. XII, p. 34.)
After this, can we speak with these people in any sort of political language? Have we not the right to say that we can
speak with these people in one language only, the language of the
Criminal Code, and regard them as common criminals, as incorrigible and hardened murderers.
Such was their "program" in the sphere of home policy, if one
may so express it. Formerly, if only out of shame, they gave as
grounds.for their struggle against the leaders of the· Soviet government and 1!he Party, shortcomings, defects and difficulties. Now they
.have already thrown off this mask. Now they admit that they had
become convinced that socialism in our country was victorious:
They came to terrorism, to murder, because their position had become hopeless, because they realized that they were isolated from
power, from the workil).g class. They came to terrorism because
of the complete absence of favourable prospects for them in the
fight for power by other methods and by other means.
Kamenev admitted -that the organization of terror was the only
means by wlhiclt 1!hey hoped to come to power and that it was
precisely on this basis of terroristic struggle that negotiations
which finally resulted .in the union of the Tuotskyites and Zinovievites were conducted and successfully concluded. Terrorism was
the real basis on which the Trotskyites and ZinovieV:ites united.
Not all of them want to admit that.
Comrades judges, i_n drawing up your verdict in your council
ch~ber, .you ~ill carefully-'-1 have no doubt about that-onoe
again go over not only the material of .the ~urt iilvestigation but
also the records of The preliminary investigation and yo~ will
become convinced of the animal fear with which the ·accused
tried to -~void admitting that terrorism was precisely the basis of
their criminal ·activities.·
That is why Smirnov wriggled so much here: He a~ils that ht>
was a member of the centre, he admits that this centre liad-adopled
terroristic line of struggle, he admits that he himaelf received
from -Trotsky the instruction$ about this terroristic- struggle-. But

a

126

at the same time he tries by every means in his power to prove
that he, Smirnov personally, did not adopt terror, did not agree
with it, and he even went so far as to say that he had left the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist centre or bloc.
I will oome back to each one of the accused, including Smirnov,
and try as fully, carefully and objectively as possible to analyze
the evidence which .proves that they committed the gravest crimes.
against the state. At present I merely wish to emphasize once
again that the accused are not political infants, that they are hardened players in the political struggle; they know perfectly well that
they must answer not only for recognizing terror "theoretically"
-for this alone they should ·ihave paid wi-th their heads-but
for having translated this "the0retica!." program inio the language
of terroristi:c practice, info iJ<he langua•ge of practical, criminal
activity.

Trotsky, Zinoviev, Kamenev-Sworn Enemies
of the Soviet lJnion
Terror was the basis of all their activities, it was the basis of the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite union. This was quite unanimously testified
to by people who were-not directly connected with each other in
their· underground work. This was· not only admitted here by
Zino.vi.ev and Kamenev, Smirnov and Ter-Vaganyan; Reingold and
Pickel; it was stated also by Bennan-Yurin, Fritz David and
Valentine· Olberg, that peculiar citizen of the Republic of Honduras,
paid agent of Trot~ky and simu1taneously of the German secret
police-the Gestapo.
AH these persons, under the weight of evidence against them.
could no longer deny and had to admit that the main, in fact the
owly means of struggle against the Soviet government and the
Party which united their criminal activity was terror, murder.
Reingold said: "The Trctskyites and all the members of the
bloc insisted and agreed on this." It was precisely the removal
through violence of the leaders of the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet government that was the fundamental aim of this Trotskyite·Zinovievite bloc, which can be quite fairly caHed, as I called it in the indictment, M association of .politicai assa•in.s.
126

These terroristic sentiments which formed the basis <if Uie
organization of the Trotskyire-Zinovievite bloc in 1932-36 were
·perhaps most distinctly and characteristically eX:pressed by the
accused Mrachkovsky, who stated both at the preliminary investigation and at this 1rial:
"Hopes for the collapse of the policy of the Party must be regarded as doomed. The methods of struggle applied up to- ilOw
have not produced positive results. Only one path of struggle remained, and that was the path of removing by violence the leader's
of the Party and the Government."
Mrachkovsky said: "The principal task is tO put Stalin· and 'the
other leaders of !he Party· and the Government ouf of the way!."
All their bestial rage and hatred were directed against the leaders of our Party, against the Pi:ilitical Bureau of the Central Committee, against Comrade Stalin, -against his glorioU.S comrades-lnartns.
It was upon them, headed by Comrade Stalin, >tliat the main
burden of the struggle against the Zinovievite-Trotskyite uiideiground organization lay. lt was under their leaderShip,. under the
leadership of Comrade Stalin, that great executor ,and keeper of
Leriin's will and testanient, that the cotinter-revolutionary TrotiJk:5fite organization was routed. It was 1Jnder their leadership; amidit
fierce battles against Trotskyite counter-revolution that Trotsltyile
counter-revolution was finaHY crushed.
I:! the fightfug "against this TrotSkyite counter-revolUtiotl, Com. rade Stalin developed and undeviatingly carried out Lenin's teachings on the.building of &ocilllism in our oountry, having aimed the
vast millions of workers and collective fan:ners with <these· teachings.
That is why the Trotskyites and. Zbtovievites, ·as well ~ llie
other most frenzied. counter-revolutionary elements. concentrated
all their efforts and their hatred and rage against soclalism on the
leaders-of our Party. That is why in March 1932, in a flt of countel'revolutionary fury, Trotsky burst out in an· open ~tter with an
appeal to "put Stalin out of the way" (this letter was found between
l!he double walls of H<>ltZ'mlln's suit case and figured as ·an exhibit
in this case).
,
Trotsky addressed this despicable appeal with still ~
J27

frankness to a number of ·his disciples abroad whom he had
recruited as assassins to be sent to the U.S.S.R. for the purpose
of organizing terroristic acts and attempts ·on the lives of the
leaders of our Soviet state and our Party. This was related in
detail here by the accused Fritz David. He stated that in November 1932 he had a conversation with T:rotsky during which
Trotsky said literally the following: "Now lhere is no other way
out except the removal by violence of Stalin and his adherents.
Terror against Stalin-that is the revolutionary task. Whoever is
a revolutionary-his hand will not tremble.'' (Vol. VIII, p. 62.) For
tihis purpose Trotsky recruited high-strung persons, impressing
upon them that they must commit this counter-revolutionary act
as if it were some sort of "historic mission.''
Berman-Yurin testified here that Trotsky systematically and
repeatedly said: "Until-Stalin is removed by violence, there will be
no possibility of changing the policy of the Party; in the fight
against Stalin we must not hesitate to adopt extreme measuresStalin must be physically destroyed."
Fritz David and Berman-Yurin discussed with Trotsky the
:assassination of Stalin. They accepted Trotsky's commission anCf
took a number of practical steps to carry it out Does not this in
it.self deserve the sternest pun~ent provided for :by our law-death by shooting?
Fritz David, Berman-Yurin, Reingold, V. Olberg, and I. N.
Smimov himself have in fact utterly exposed Trotsky's role iu
this matter. Even Smirnov, who stubbornly denied that he took
any part in the terroristic activitie8 of the· 'rrotskyite-Zinovievite
et>ntre, could not help admitting that he personally had received
the directions on individual terror against the leaders of the Soviet government and the C.P.S.U. in 193.l from Trotsky's son, Sedov, that these directions on terror were confirmed by Trotsky in
1932 in the instructions bJ:"ought from abroad by Gaven and conveyed to Smimov. Smimov tried to alleviate the gravity of his own
position by stating that the instruction on terror which he had received from Sedov was Sedov's personal atlitude. But this is a
worthlesi ezplanaoon. It is obvious to everyone that Sedov waa no
authority whatever for Smirnov. Ter-Vaganyan and Mrachkovsky
eiorroborated this here when they said that had they thought that
128

the direction on terror citme from Sedov they would have spat
upon it with supreme contempt.
The accused Ter-Vaganyan, one of the principal organizers of
the united centre, confirmed that Smirnov, while abroad, really
did receive from Trotsky instructions to adopt terror. TerVaganyan merely veiled his evidence by substituting for the word
terror the phrase: "sharp struggle against the leaders of the
C.P.S.U." Later, however, he had to decipher this and to admit
that these were instructions, the content of which was terrorism
and terrorism alone.
Finaliy, you heard the witness S?fonova whose confrontation
with the accused bas probably left a: deep impression upon the
memories. of everyone present in this court. At this conf:ronmtion,
Safonova, ·whose case is being taken up separately because the
investigation is still continuing, fully confirmed that Sm!mov
received from Trotsky instructions on individual terroi: through
ScJ.ov in 1931, and later through Gaven.
On the basis of these facts we can take it as absolutely estab·
lished that it was precisely Trotsky's instructions on terrorism that
served as the basisior the development of the terroristic activities
of the united centre. Trotsky's instructions .to organize a united
centre and to adopt terrorism were accepted by the Trotskyite underground organization. Ziinn\<·iev and Kamenev, the leaders of the
Zinovievite section of the bloc, arrived at the same idea and also
accepted Trotsky's instructiOOS-as the basis of the activities of the
united centre and underground oiiganizations.
These bitter and ingrahied enemies could not look calmly on
the growing prosperity of our people, of our country, which had
emerged onto the highroad of socialism.
The U.S.S.R. is achieving victory. The U.S.S.lt is bu~g
socialism._ iii tlie U.S.S.R. socialism is triumphant, and beCauae ct
that their hatred towards the Central Ccimmitiee, iowardS Stiilla
'and the government to whom the country owes tNs victory, of
whom the country is proud, grows more and more.
From their gloomylinderworld Trotsky, Zinoviev and Kammev
issue the despicable call: Put out of the way, kill! The ~
ground machinery begins to work, knives are sharpened, motterc
are loaded, bombs are charged, false documents .aze iwrltta sm4
129

~ahll'icared,

sec:ret coDilections are established with the German
political police, people are sent to their posts, they engage in
revolver practice; and .finally they shoot and kill.
That is the main thing! The counter-revolutionaries not only
dream of ten-or, they. not only devise plans for a terroristic plot,
or for terroristic attempts, they not only pi;epare to commit these
foul mmes. they commit them, they shoot and kill!
The· main thing, iii this trial is that they transformed their
OOWll:er-revolutionary thoughts into counter-revolutionary deeds,
their eGunter-revolutionary theory into counter-revolutionary terroristie practice; they not only talk about shooting, they shoot,
shoot and. kill!
That is the niain thing. They killed Comrade Kirov, they were
getting ready to kill Comrades Stalin, Voroshilov, Kaganovich, Orjol!!.ikidze, Zhdanov, Kossior and Postyshev. This is what we are
·trying these people. for, these organizers of secret murder, these
certified murderers.
And that 'is why we d.emand that the Court judge them as
severely as our Soviet law commands, judge them as our socialist
conscience demands.
Murder-this is the whole "program" of the home policy of
these people.
\Vhat was their foreign policy?
Here the shades of the dead arise, here the old "Clemenceau
theses" are revived, here the cloven hoof of Trotsky again becomes
visible.
Trotsky's letter received ·by Dreitzer contained three brief
pcints: 1) put Stalin and Vor~hilov out of the way; 2) unfold
work of onganizing nuclei in tl1e army; ii) in the event of war, take
advantage of every setbac.k and possible confu~ion to seize the
leadership.
Tbis is avowed banking on defeat.
TI::is is the old Clemenceau thesis, but in a new version, edited
by ~Rle united centre ~f the Trotskyite-Zinovievite terroristic bloc.
,Fritz David stated during the preliminary investigation and
(',oml..'l'lm.ed it in this Court (,and it :fully con.forms with a number
o~ h'\storieal documents, the evidence of other accused and the very
nmwre of the task which confronted Trotsky, Zinoviev and Ka180

menev), that in one of his conversations with Trotsky the latter
asked him: "Do you think this discontent will disappear in the
event of a war between the Soviet Union and the Japanese?" (He
referred to the discontent which he thought existed in our country.) "No, on the contrary," said Trotsky, "under these conditions
the forces hostile to the reginie will try to unite, and in that case
our task will be to unite and take the lead of these discontented
ma·sses, to arm them and lead· them against the ruling bureaucrats"
(Vol. VIII, p. 61).
·
Trotsky repeated this in his letter of 1932 (evidently this is his
idee fixe) and in a conversa1ion with Berman-Yunin.
Berman-Yurin stated: "In connection with the international
situation at that time ·Trotsky told me that the task of demoralizing
our military forces was· of particular importance, for in the event
of a war against the Soviet Union large masses _would be called up
to the army." Trotsky and the Trotskyites together with the Zinovievites calculated on being able to influence these masses very
easily. "Trotsky said to me literally the following," added BermanYurin: "'We will defend tlhe Soviet Union .provided the Stalin
leadership is overthrown'" (Vol. IV, p. 100).
Such was their program in foreign policy!
Perhaps this is all an invention? Perhaps Fritz David and
Berman-Yurin just gave :rein to their fantasy? Perhaps this is all
a pack of lies, an invention, the irresponsible chatter of the accust-.i
who are trying to say as much as they can against the others in
order .to mitigate their own ultimate fate? Nol This is not an invention, not fantasy! It is the truth! Who does not know thal
Trotsky, together with the accUJSed l{amenev and Zinovie'v now in
the dock, several years ago p·roclaiimoo the "Clemenceau thesis,"
that they said' that it was necessary, in the event of war, to wait
until the enemy had got within a distance of 80 kilometers of Moscow and then to rise in arms against the Soviet government, to
pverthrow it. This is an historical fact. It cannot be denied. And
that is why it must be admitted that the eWde?M:e given by BermanYurin and Fritz David in this connection corresponds to the truth.
Such was the "foreign policy" ·program of these people. For
this program alollt! our Soviet people will hang these traitors OD
the very first gates! And it will serve them right!

vouo1e-aeallng, vecepizon . amt J'rovocattQ,n;c-J.:11.e rrzr;zcrpat

.

. . Methods of the Trotsky~~~~Z,fr!..~Vf~~!ie;· •. · . ' ' ' ' · :

Let us now turn to the methods by\i/hfoh'tnese people'operated.
This;·perhaps, is one of the most shaniefllt·pages
the story
Of their Sh:am~ful criminal activities.
·• · · ·· · •· c ·'1 ;i ·
In'crinfin°riiity' with the "prindple'' o'f' th~'Trotskyite-Zinovievite
Widergrtirtrid 'ofoc to seize p~wer by :inf means'; tliimeriiberii of
this bl~c widely practised double-dealing'a.'s'theirpfincipal method
in their relations with the Party and the Governnie'nf They fransro~ thiS doUble-tlealing into a system ~hlcli 9,11 the AZefs and
Malinovs~ys; ~ll the ~ret police, with. aU 'th~ spie~;-pr6vocateurs
and ageiifis for diversive activities, Iliight ~~l.i env:Y: . ' '
· Reing()<1d. ~tat~d that in 1933-34 Zinoviev 'told. hi~ ~n a private
conversation~a~d
Zinoviev '.corroborated
.th{s
before .the whole
.. . .
. . ·- - a. . . .
,.
-. :
...
. :: ·: ..... ' . . '. "; .
.
world at. th.is ~ial-:--that "the principal, practical task that con·
fronted •. Jli~i:r.. m1dergrourid organization .wa~ · to. organize their
terroristic w_o_rk -. so . secretly
as --not,
to .c~n.i,pr~illise)hemselves
in
.
.
..
.. '· -. . '. ·,any.:way.".,·
;_._,., .·'<; ,:, .. ,., .;\··.·
Perhaps this is an exaggeration? Of COl,lr~ •DO~. Wl:lat ll!!ingQld
said conforms to the logic of things. . ' ... . . . ,~
'IThe main :thing. during ~ invesMi~l!on;" ,, s:P.dc Zi11l>Yiev in
instruCting his accomplices, ''is to deny, ?JJ eQnn,ection.-with .the
·organization, arguing.that terror is incompatible.with,the views of
BolsheViks•Marxists" (Vol XXVII, p~ 112),,,,
~- Ee:
Trotsky also recommended that dn :fhe:<event~pfi:a terroristic
·act being committed,' they -should dis8ociateztheniselves from the
Trotskyite .ocganization and. take up· a. position analogou,se to that
taken' by·. the central· :committee of' the Socialist-Revofotionarics
toward Madam Kaplan who shot at Vladimir Ilyicb' ·(Leriin). We
know. what that means. We remember thafaifter Kaplan fired her
treachei!6us nullet at Lenin, the Central E:omliiitiee:of'the Socialist··Revolutionafies' issued a leaflet'fo whicli they'Ciit~goricii.lly declared
that tbey h~d ririlhing to do with thls.throtistic act. ·Trotsky,
Zino'vfe~ an.d Kamene~ adopted th~ ·saihltactic~~ · '•'
·
... zh~oyiev ;~aid: "We took.the path of:a.catefully considered and
profour{dly secret plot~ we rega'.rded ours~lves 'as~Marxists, and
remembering the formula 'insurreetion -~-a~ ~rt,·; altered it tc suit
132

in

~

··~.

'~

~:

'~-

~

·~:

~

;'<

·

our purposes and declared that 'plotting against the Party, again>t
Stalin, is an a.rt.' "
The masters of this "art" are now sitting in the dock. I will not
say that they are highly skilled masters. They are unskilled masters. Nevertheless, they managed to do their despicable work. What
did their "art" consist of? The foremost part of thdr plan was by
every possible means to mask their truly criminal faces.
This perhaps is one of the most striking cases in history when
the word mask acquired its real meaning: these people put masks
on their faces, adopted the pose of repentant sinners who had.
bro1'en with the past, who had abandoned their old erring ways
and mistakes which grew into crime.
It is characteristic that precisely at the time when the united
Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre 'was intensifying its activities to the
utmost, when these terroristic activities reached their highest point
of development, when they were advancing to the consummation
of the despicable murder of Comrade Kirov, it was precisely at that
period that Zinoviev sent a: letter of repentance to the Central
'Committee. In this letter dated May 8, 1933, that is to say, when
the preparations for terroristic acts were at their height, Zinoviev
not only renounced all his past mistakes, hut hypocritically vowed
his loyalty to socialism and to the Party.
During the very days in which he wa·s preparing to strike :l
treacherous blow at the very heart of the Party, preparing a terror-·
istic act against Comrade Stalin, this criminal who, like all those
sitting in the dock at the present time, had lost every semblance of
a human being, ended his letter with the following words:
"I ask you to ·believe that I am speaking the truth and
nothing but the truth. I ask you to restore me to the ranks
of the Party and to give me an opportunity of working for
the common cause. I give my word as a revolutionary that
I will be the most devoted member of the Party, and will do
all I possibly can at least to some extent to atone for my guilt
before'·the Party and its Central Committee.''
l We know now what these words were worth, we know that
Zinoviev did all he possibly could to damage the Party and the
work of building socialism in our country, to damage the cause
of the whole international Communist movement.
133

On June 16, 1933', he published an article in Pravda entitled
"Two Parties." He publishes an article in the Central Organ of our
?arty in "'hich he does everything to prove his loyalty to the
Party, roundly condemns opportunism and sings hallelujahs to
the :victories· achieved by the Party.
This was on. May 8 and June 16, that is to say, in the summer
of 1933. And in that very summer of 1933, as l1as now been definit.ely established, at a c®ference of the Trotskyite~Zinovievite cen.m, ·Zinoviev instructs Bakayev ro start the practical realization of
measures of terrorism.
Zinoviev :was indignant with Smirnov here when the latter
reproached him for telling lies. Smimov himself did not utter a
llingle word of truth here, but he reproached Zinoviev for telling
Ires. ·Zinoviev was offended and said that the difference between
him ~d Sm.irnov was that he, Zinoviev, "had firmly decided at
this last moment to speak the whole truth, whereas sin.irnov had
evidenf:ly taken a different decision.''
Permit me, comrades judges, to warn you against this statement
rJJf Zinoviev's. Do not believe that he is really speaking the whole
truth here.
At.the Leningrad trial on January 15-16 Zinoviev and Kamenev
performed not at all badly in one of the scenes of their cunning,
~dious 'masquerade. While giving evidence at the trial on
January 15-16, 1935, Kamenev· wanted to create the impression
tilat he was an enemy who had finally and sincerely laid down
hia anns and was telling all that was in his heart against the government and the Party. He then rec,alled some l!pi!tode in which Zinoviev concealed something of what was said in a com:ersation wj.,-Yi
Trotsky. In a voice of pathos and "unfeigned'" indignation Kamerlw reproached Zinoviev for having concealed. this fact, for not
~g the truth.
But at that very time Kamenev himself, and Zinoviev, tried to
~ve us. to deceive the Court and the whole country by stating
~t they had had DO connection 'whatever with the murder Of
Sergei Mironovich Kirov. Then, as now, literally ill the same words
that were uttered yesterday, Zinoviev and Kamenev vowed that
they were speaking the whole truth. It may be said that for Kamen" and Zinoviev the trial of January 15-16, 1985, was a sort of

7

.

134·

l!'efief.USZ.~ ef fae pYesent h'i&i., whJd1 ~hey d.~ imt>i ·~· perhaps;
~m which fuey did noll escape -any moir€ than tb.ey .eoa:id ·esei'J!pe
!i>'<!m fate.
ll will c~me baek to h~ "E"em>lil~t:k,.,blie" e'iiide~ ,gi-%'ill.at fhe irial

m Le;:;fog:rad. 1 mer;i:i.on it nm'i' cn'iy :l:n o•dei:. fo w'ilrn. yma, and
through you, fu.-ough fhe Cmrct,. to w~,rr.. ·the whale CG!!Wl:y, :not
oruy against Kamenev ami Zi.ll.ovie"'.", hut s.gai:o.2! cl!: other douhlede&len,. ,:di othe; ~raifors whom 1mfo:r!lllin.aiel~r we $ti:ll have hi: our
~anks ail.di ~·vho falk about iheh- :re:p-ent:f:mce, .who filssocfate themselves, a;~d mask L'lemselv<es, in ordeir fue. kiter fo thrust fa.elf
knife into 11he· back 0f the Party, Gf our ·country, of Clir great cause.
Not the slightest confidence must he p!aced m these ceriified
and ha;rdened deceivers!
They themS?elves understa."1<l that ;they <lo n(ft deserve ~my
confidence. \Vhil.e examini~ Zinoviev I. asked Mm: "Are you.
speaking the whole truth now?" And he answered: "l'l!ow I sm
s·peaking the whole truth tCli the very end."
But what proof is the:;:e of iliis? How ca'll. we believe thei:n
when they have surpassed all conceptions o:f perfidy, cmmL~g, deceit and treachery?
Zinoviev carried this perfidy fo rnch length:; that after t.~e
murder of Sergei Mironovkh KiJrov he sen't an obituary notice to
Prai>da. The only thing he said here 1!1bout iha~ was: "That ohlt~
uary 'll'as notyublishea as far as I rem~mbcr." And that is aH.
Here is L'le ohihiary; I have it hi. my ham:i. Zhmviern'.lated U,
if I am not mistaken, the 4th Ol." /lli of Dece:mh~r, most probabl'f
the 4th of December.
You, Zinoviev, gave this olbih:.ary notice on Comrilde K!J:cw ~he
title "The Beacon Ma'1." :How did yoli start ilie obituary no~
which you intended for me :pt'e!!S, i!!l:ld whic.\l, CGD1leql!€1ilti;)', WI!!~
io become- [>i!iblic properly'?
"l'his could be observed ihroughoui ~i~e ! i yea•-s oil vm' rev·
ot111ftio:n, i;i every :mcmeni w~'oe;;11 ~he en~my tocottiv~a a~ ruil:e a
blow at fhe Bolsheviks. • . • That fa wha11 haiippei!e<l! ~j'b.:m ftae
enemy succeeded in striking a paiJPable blow GD the bailleftcl$
~f foe Ch>il War, vn&i is wha~ h01PJ~"'1e;i! . . ." '31e., .:.ftc.
A11d forrther on Zinoviev writes: "The @faf of ti~e P<ll~Y is
the ernef of the whole people, of all ilie people$ :.;I the

u.s.s.a

l35

The Party's mourning is the mourning of the whole of our
great country. . .. The whole people have felt the bitterness of bereavement."
It is true that the bitterness of bereavement and anger
against the treacherous shot was felt by the whole country. That
feeling was really shared by the whole couiitry, young and old.
But to what extent does this concern you?
"The foul murder of Sergei Mironovich Kirov has in truth
roused the whole Party, the whole of the Soviet Union." "The
loss of this beloved and dear man has been felt by all as the
loss of one who is nearest and dearest of all. . . ."
This is what you, the accused Zinoviev, wrote in _this terrible and disgraceful article. Why did _the Party lose this near
and infinitely dear S. M. Kirov, a·ccused Zinoviev? The Party
lost this man who was so near and dear to us because you, the
accused Zinoviev, killed him, you killed him: with your own
hands, your hands are stained with Kirov's blood! . . .
"Beioved son of the Party," you wrote. Wnat insolent sacri·
lege!
"A son of the working class-this is whaf this Beacon Man
was," "our dear; deep, strong. . . . One could not help believing
him, one could not help loving him; one could not help being proud
of him."
This is what Zinoviev wrote, exceeding all bounds of cynicism!
·
Such is this man. He loved him, he was proud of him, and he
killed biml The miscreant, -the murderer, molll'DIS over his victim! Has anything like it ever occurred before?
What can one say; what words can one use fully to de·
scribe the utter baseness and loathesomcness of this: Sacrilege!
Perfidy! Duplicity! Cunning!
It was you, Zinoviev, you who with your· sacrilegious hand
extinguished this beacon, and you began pUblicly and hypocri·
tically to tear your hair in order to deceive the people.
Whom did ~u kill? You ·killed a magnificent Bolshevik,
a passionate tribune, a man who was dangerous fo you, a man
who fought devotedly for Lenin's testament and against you.
136

You killed this man in a flash of ti.me by the bullet fired by
the despicable hand of Nikolayev, and two or three days after
wards you sent an article to the Pravda in which you wrote
about the "extinguished beacon." Where shall we· find the word
with which to appraise this despicable trick! I can not find the
words in my vocabulary!
We will now pass to Kamenev, the second pillar of the socalled Zinovievite group, this hypocrite "in an ass's skin," as he
himself expressed it at the Seventeenth Congress of the Party.
I ask the Court to pay attention to the articles Kamenev published in 1933. Kamenev wrote these articles almost simultai:teouslj
with those written by Zinoviev by mutual agreement. Kamenev
published an article in Pravda in which he, like Zinoviev, renounced
his past erring ways, condemned his own mistakes and said that
"the man who had fought Lenin for decades became the most important figure in the opposition," etc., etc. "It ·is clear," wrote
Kamenev in this article of May 25, 1933, "that lhe resistance to the
policy headed by Comrade Stalin was based on the premises which
inade members of the Party in October 1917 come out as the opponents of the policy of Lenin." Weeping and groaning, Kamenev
tried to prove tlhat he had broken off relations with his old friends
and concluded his article with an appeal to all of them to abandon
all resistance which was interfering with the work of building socialism.
This was in May HJ33. And in the summer of 1933, after
the return of Kamenev and Zinoviev from exile, a meeting of
the Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre was held in Zinoviev's apartment
for the purpose of organizing terroristic acts against the leaders
of the Party and the Soviet government.
When Kamenev was asked about this here, his replies were
curt. The following dialogue took place between me and him,
.which I will take the liberty to repeat. I asked:
"What appraisal Should be ·given the articles and statements
you wrote in 1933, in which you expressed loyally to the Party?
Deception?
"Kamenev: 'No, worse than deception.'
"Vyslii11sky: 'Perfidy?'
13;

"1Ka.meie.ev: -~~~01"321'
"Vyshinsky: 'Wo~ th:im. deception; worse ~haa psrndy-~
tke word. Trel£ron?
".Kamene1:1: 'You h&ve fmind ilie word!'"
Late:;- on he srud . th.at he not only tlid this in agreeme:nl:
with Zinoviev, but that it was all clone in fulfilmert.t of ~ pl.an
i9 seize power that had been rlirawn up beforehand, which plan was
combined with the necessity of winning confidenre.
Them . is a small .detail which is oi' some iw,pm:1a:<ra4!e for
defining the .morld. 011", if you wil.i., .ihe ideologiea~ leYel of the
~ecused Kru:nenev, for c.b.aracle;ri;dyo..g his interests at tl.'re time,
for characterizing some of his moral premises."
I would lt%.e to mentbi'i! one of tile books !l'f M'..schi2vem
{V"t !). It W!l$'p-::ibHshed in 1934 by the "Academda" Pu.n:b1ishing P..ouse, of which Kamenev was then the head, and hm1
io prefooee by Ram.enev. It is a very interesting book. H was
wri.Uen in !:he !6ih century. The author wrote it for a prince
~ .order to ms~rnct. hir:::i in the art of governing the state· in ac·
oordance with his prfoc-d.y interests. Machia,,.·em wrote: "You mus~
know that there are two ways of contending, by law and by
force: t!,J.e first is pmpei: fo men; !he second to beasts.
"But because mm:iy ti.mes foe first is insufficient, recourse
must be had to the second. A prince must poss-.<>ss ilie nature
of both beast and man."
This pleased Kamenev very m~ch, and in his sho:<'t preface io ihis book he wrote the following inieresiing words: "A
master of political aphorism and a :brilliant dfa.iectkian, ... "
(According ro Ka.ul'enev Machianm was a dialeciicia..11! This
hardened schemer M..'f'il.s oirt fo ~e a dial.ectkian!) "A master
of political aphoriml. ' .." A fi!l!.e apltodsfil indeed1 Machiawrote: ·to fight
memis of laws is characteristic of ·men,
to fight by means of force is eharaeteristic of the beast; pursue
this bestial policy end you,, says · Machiavelli, will a.chi.eve your
fOS'I. ·AM this the e.em.sed Kam2nev calls being a "master of
polit§ecl aphorism."
Let
hear what Kamenev writes further: " . . . A dialec•,tifian who from his cih,;eJrYations had formed the firm op~nfon
~- -~- concepts of the criteria of good arid evil, a? tl1e pe:r138

.rem

by

us

missible and impermissible, of the lawful and criminal were
relative. . . ." Evidently, according to Kamenev, this is .eialec·
tics: mixing up .what is criminal with what is not .criminai; 1he
lawful with the unlawful, good with evil is a new "Marsian" mterpretation of dialectics a la Machiavelli.
"Machiavelli," wrote KaIUenev in 1934, "made his treatise
into an astonishingly shlll"P and expressive cahllogu.e of the
rules by which the ·ruler of his tiine was to be guided in ordfr
lo win power, to hdld it and victoriously to withstand &llY
attacks upon it." You had a good teacher, Kamenev, .but you.
and you must be given credit-' for this, have excelled. your
teacher.
~
Further on you write in this preface: "This is far from
being the sociology of power., but from this prescription *1ie&"e
magnificently stand out the zoological features of the struggle
for power in the society of slave owners based on the rule ·of
the rich minority. over the toiling majority."
That is so. But you wanted to eml>loy in OW' society ~
methods of struggle and the principles of struggle that were
worthy of slave owners; you wanted to Sip!ply ihem againit
our society, •inst socialism. You write: ..Thus, this secretary
of the Florentine bankers and their ambassador at the Pope's
Court, lby accident or design, created a shell of tremendous
explosive force which disturbed the minds of rulers f« centuries. . . ." Y0t1, Kamenev, adopted the rules of Maclllavelli,
you develqped them to the .utmost point' of unscrupulousness
and immorality, you modernized them and perfected them.
I do not ask you, comrades judges, to regard this book. as
-material evidenre in this case. l em not ming thb book ,io
prove that the ac~ are guilty of the crimes of which. the,are charged. I simply thought it necessary to devote a few minutes of attention to this circumstance, in order to show the
ideblogical source .from which .Kamenev ·and Zinoviev obtaiDW
their sustenance at that time-these mm :Who even now, ,.fltt
this trial, try to preserve their noble pose ·of. Manisb capabJ.e
of thinking and arguing in conformity wit& the principles of
Marxism.
..
.Drop this clownish farce! Tear the mask from your faoa·.
alt

once and· for Slll Here Kamenev calls Machiavelli's book a
shell of enormous explosive force. Evidently Kamenev and Zinoviev. wanted to use' this shell to blow up our socialist fatherland; They .misca!lculatedl And although Machiavelli was a
puppy and a yokel compared with them, nevertheless, he was their
spiritual preceptor. "Machiavellism," and Azelism served you as
the source of your activities iand your crimes. Now this has
been e:xiposed by Zinoviev and Karnenev themselves: murder,
cunning, perfidy and masquerade were the principal,. decisive
methods i.n their criminal activities.
Y:esterday; Zinoviev and Kamenev, frankly if cynically, admitted that this entered into the plan of their activities. This
was testified to by Reingold, this was testifled to by others of
the accused, and I· think that a sufficiently exhaustive characterization of these methods is contained in the materials which
I have presented. Summing up this part of my speech, I can
say that the Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre was organiz.ed on a terrorist basis and had its· program, a very primitive and simple
one,. it is"'true, expressed in only a few words, a program· which
did· not even need for drafting the two hours to which the
accused themselves contemptuously referred. Their program of
ho~e policy was confined to murder; their program of foreign
poUcy wait confined to the defeat of the U.S.S.R. in war; their
method was perfidy, cunning ·and treason.

The Cou:nter-Revolutibnary Terroristic. Acti11ities of iltc
Trotskyitcs-Zinovievites are Fully Proved

r now pass to the second part of my speech for the prosecution, tO the ·practical activities of the so-called united centre
and· to the· characterization of the role of each of the accused
in .this crimina'l conspiracy against the Soviet government.
· There :is itot the slightest doubt that the union of the Zinovievifo and Trotskyite counter-revolritionacy groups which took
place in the autumn of 1932 arose and grew strong on the soil
and on the basis' of the mutual recognition of terror as the sole
and decisive method fa the struggle for po\vet~a struggle which
was then the fundamental and principal task of the Trotskyites
and·Zinovievites.
140

An otganiiatiofr existe(t An underground, conter-tevoIU.tlonazy;
terrorist.gi-oui) existed:-·Existed and· functioned~ However much
not succeed; The facts
Smirnov may lcy to' deny this here, he
~re too strong; 'the -fads :are too· numerous. We, the. prosecution,
have every ground for asserting that an underground; counterrevolutionary; Trofskyife,zinoVievite g1'oup existed, that this terrorist organization was created, that it was created precisely as !l
terrorist orgruiizaf!ion, that it developed lts activities precisely as
terroristic actirities,_·tha( it prepared for terr~ristic. attempts at
assassination and that, t.o(lur great misfortune and h9rror, one of
these atten;ipts· was .!1Ucces1>ful. The foul murder of Sergei Mironovich Kirov on December i., l934, was committed by this organizaorgal;iization
the. crimes which Hus
most horribl~
tion.
.
'
"
.
. of
. '.
. .· . . . :. :. ' . .
. Thisis.fhe
succeeded in cop~~iting.
In J;mua,ry,1,93_5. r<~ fl'ied,the Moscow centre in connection
with the l,t'.ial of th~. I.e~ngra~ centre which. took p~ace a little be.· ,
fore that, abOut two weeks before, and ~s a result of which L.
Nikolayev, Kotolynov, Rumyantsev, Sossitsky and a number of
others were convicted and shot. At that time we did not yct know
who were the real authors, instigators and participants in this
monstrous crime. But we were on the right track. The investiga-.
lion directed by the People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs
proceeded along the true and correct trail of exposing the real
orgarnzers of this crime, although the amount of evidence available at that time did not enable us to make a direct charge against
Kamenev, Zino\riev, Evdokimov and Bakayev of organizing this
murder, of guiding this murder, of committing this murder.
The verdict in the case of the so-called Moscow centre in which
Kamenev, Zinoviev, Evdokimov aoo several others played the
principal roles merely said in regard to the role they played that
they had fanned the terrorist sentiments of their accomplices, that
they had created the objective soil upon which this crime inevitably
h~d to grow up and did grow up.
· Being absolutely objective, the investigating and prosecuting
authorities did not then charge Kamenev, Zinoviev, Evdokimov
and Bakayev wHh directly instigating, directly orgnnizing this
murder. The indictment stated that the investigating authorities
had not established their direct parl~c1pation. Nevertheless, all the

will

~·

'

141

materlals in the possession of the investigating authorities permitted them to say that these people-Kamenev, Zinoviev, Bakayev
and Evdokimov-were closely connected with this crime and, as
they themselves expressed it, had to bear complete moral and
political responsibility for it.
·In oonformity with this Kamenev, Zinoviev, Evdokimov and
Bakayev were given in the Moscow centre case a relatively
inild sentence-only deprivation of liberty.
Kamenev, Zinoviiev, Evdokimov and Bakayev did all they possibly could to misrepresent the re:d state of affairs, to shield th~
real organizers and accomplfoes in the crime. They tried to make it
appear that they had had no hand ill this :sordid and despicable
affair. Speaking in lofty style, they declared that the counter-revolution had chosen them as the instrument of its criminal activity:, n ·was not they who had chosen counter-revolution as the
instrument of their struggle, it was counter-revolution which had
chosen them as its instrument. ...
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Bakayev and Evdolcimov did all they
could to assert and prove that they could not bear more responsibility for this foul murder than moral and political responsibility;
but they declared that they were fully and honestly prepared to
bear this responsibility, and admitted the correctness and the
justness of the charges brought against them within those limits.
During the trial on January 15-16, 1935, Zinoviev said: "There
are many of us sitting in the dock, more than fifteen persons, each
with a different biography. Among us there .are many who have
belonged to the working class movement for many years. Much of
what they have done they did because they had confidence in me,
and for that, of course, I must torture myself. The task that I see
confronti~ me af this stage is to repent fully, frankly and sincerely, before the court of the working clas.S, of what I .understood
to be a mistake and a crime, and to say it in sueh a way that it
should all end, once and for all, w:ith this group."
I have already said that this statement of Zinoviev's was a pose,
a manreuvre, a taoticai move.
This· is the way crimhial.s always behave;. Accused of murder
and robbery, they plead guilty only to robbery. Aroused of rob-

142

becy, tl1ey plead guilty only to larceny. Accused of larceny, they
plead guilty only to ref"eiving stolen goods. These ru.-e the usual
tricks of criminals: charged with graver crimes, they plead
guilty to lesser crimes. It is a trick to wipe out the traces of tlie
crime eommitted, counting on the credulity of people who still,
in many cases, even in criminal cases, show some. confidence in
criminals.
This was the position taken up by·Zinoviev. An an~ogous position was taken up-and this they will not deny.:_by Kamenev,
Evdokimpv and Bakayev. Caught in 1935, almost red-handed,
these people admitted responsibility for the minor crime in order
to evade responsibility, real responsibHity, for the major crime.
Zinoviev talked about making a "frank and sincere" cmi.fession,
but lte did not really do that. Actmrlly, they did all they cou!d to
shield their accO!Dlplices from <the hand of Soviet justice, fo leave
themselves some reserves, in order at the necessary moment to use
these reserves against our Party, against the leaders of our country.
This explains the whole position taken up by Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdokimov and Baikayev at the Leningrad trial on January 15-16, 1935. "It is true," said Zinoviev, "that we are being
trued on objective features." He said that he did not know many of
the people who were with him in the dock at tliat time. Zinoviev, ii
would appear, did not know either Evdokimov, or Geriik, or Kamenev, or Sakhov: ... Zinoviev said tiba.t subjectively they were
"loyal'.' to the working class.
Zinoviev even had the effrontery to allege that he and his 15
accomplices were subjectively loyal to the working class and did
not want to take the path of counter-revolution, but objectively
· things turned out the other way. Why did things turn out ihe other
way? I would like the accused Zinoviev in his speech in defence
to say how it happened that although he was subjectively loyal to
the working class, objectively it turned out the other way. This
1 cannot be the case; such things do not happen. If, objectively, it
really turned out that way, it was only because your subjective
loyalty to the revo~wtion, accused Zinoviev, was fajse and rotten! 'What were you thinking about when you said these things?
I ask you to tell us al:iout that too, in your speeeh in defence.
1'3

In your fight against the Soviet government you armed youi'self not only with rage but with firearms. You carried out your
criminal designs in practice. You yourself spoke about duplicity,
but you spoke about it in such a way as to conceal the fact that
even at that moment you were continuing the policy of duplicity.
You said: "I am accustomed to feel that I am a leader; for me,
personally, that played an enormous role." You said:
"!am accustomed to feel that I am a leader, and it goes without saying that I should have known everything. If I am removed
from the leadership, it is either an injustice, or a misunderstanding, or for a few months. Tnis is no justification, but I ~m telling
you all I think, and thereby I am extracting from my body the
/fast splinter of the crimes that are being unfolded here."
Zinoviev extracted the "last splinter" at the Leningrad trial. ...
No! He did not do-l!!at! He left that splinter, and not only that one,
but several, in the body of our socialist country in order to continue to prepare for and commit the gravest crimes. You said:
" ... ! did not think otherwise: how can I be without my circle,
without knowing everything, without being in the very heart of
politics," etc.?
That was the thought that was torturing you-you thought that
nothing could happen without you. . . . Yaur position in the past
was determined by deeds, just as your present position is determined by your deeds. Approaching the question as to whether there
was a centre, you said: Of course there was one up to 1929. You
tried to assert that there was no centre in the subsequent years •.
that strictly speaking it did not function after 1929. That was deception. The old Zinovievite centre was transformed into the
centre of the united Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc. It was reor·
ganized, it became somewhat stronger because several groups
were consolidated. In 1932 it began to develop its activities on a
wider scale. In 1933 it displayed particulaT activity, it prepared
for a number of terroristic acts, and in 1934 it committed one of
them.
Zinoviev said, "this ls not the centre .that existed in.'1926-27,"
and that he had no connection whatever w\th this c~ntre. How did
Zinoviev then put the question of connection with the· Leningrad

i41

centre? H~ said that "there was a group coni,;isting of Kotolynov,
Mandelstmnm, Myasnikov and others." An important role was
played by Kotolynov, which, Zinoviev iilleges, he leanied from the
indictment in the case of Kirov's murder.
· Zinoviev wanted to assert that he learned about one of the
organizers of the Leningrad terrorist group only from the in~ct~
ment!

. Was that ·reail;,r the case? No, it was not. Zinoviev sent B~ayev
to Leningrad to establish .contacts with the ~~olayev~Ki)tolyriov
group and to investigate how Nikolayev, ·:K6t~lynov, M~~
stamui and others were preparing to ~ommit. the crm;.e.
Here again we have d~eit, lies•. ag~ ~llil¥luflag~l
"We sought rapprochement with- them'." Ak~dy" ~ .193~, iJ).
spite of all the camouflage, Zinoviev. had to li.,¥:t · thl!t.; ~~: lffl1f
sought rapprochement ·with KotolynoY .m.id N~olayev, aod.. f\hat
he found this rapprochement. Now this has ~ establiiibed •
absolute precision.
Zinoviev related that in 1932 he met Levin., who W,aS :~~l~
1935 in connection with the murder of cOmrade.X!r.pv, and.~~:
"We did not talk about organization. Nor was-there anY ru>eci fC!lf
this: i:ny hints were understood, I ·was a11 ~~~ty f~ ~
hewas an authority forme;-I kne.w·thatthis,~Qf the-'l~
less group' would do what we told him.~' This, too,con~$Jl1i!ll~
ber of-half hints ~nd half·admissions;·wbich qiUy,~sJ,
8fter a n'wnber of clues exposing Zino,vie-v)l~~~Ueded, madll
it possible to ensure Zinoviev's full confelaie~.-.91·~ ,_rUn:~
crime. Now.Zinoviev no longer conceals the:~~·~
Bakayev tried very bard to. Jllinimize; .
.Already in January 1935, in: oon'ilectlaait-.rtJte<.lloseow
centre case, Zinoviev admitted· that Vladimir>~·~~
iarly intimate viith Bakayev. But y~terday-~:~-~
mize this intimacy, to minimli:e it by statmlf <that·he 4id ~.
1
to meet Levin in Leningrad for colisplrative, :teiroristlc· p~
But these were the only purposes possible;•hete·mdl•~bi~
existed. All the time he tried to inipreiS: es.p'IDie tb6 ~:•'fol'·tbfS
purpose" from the evidence and the I~ No: lhlby~ 1 ~
~a11 not expWige those words;'they

-..m!

cannot"M:a.p--:*•

1C5

you went there "for this purpose," as an expert, an expert in terror-

iSm, :ind your journey was not accidental!
Why did not Zinoviev send Reingold, Pickel or even Evdokimov to Leningrad? Why did Zinoviev choose Bakayev and no
other to negotiate with the Leningrad group, with the, group that
-was to murder Comrade Kirov? I find the reply to that. '!Uestion
in Zinoviev's evidence, and partly in thait of Bakayev, at the trial
on January 15-16, 1935. Zinoviev's choice fell on Bakayev because
Bakayev was most closely connected with Levin, who was the
representative of the Zinovievites in .Leningrad, who was the leader
of the Leningrad terrorist underground organization, as he himself admitted before llhe Military Collegium, last year. We also find
confirmation of this in Zinoviev's evidence: "Bakayev knew him
particularly closely, he was one of the important organizers of the
anti-Party struggle in Leningrad. . • ."
Accused Zinoviev, was it only anti-Party struggle? It was an
anti-Soviet struggle, a counter-revolutionary struggle, a struggle
which by its very nature oore an openly counter-revolutionary,
anti-state, anti-Soviet character!
Zinoviev went on to say: "I did not give him any instructions."
Well, you know this is jesuitry that can hardly be exceeded. It is
like the reply of the Jesuit monk who, whe<n asked: "Did this man
pass here?" answered, pointing up his sleeve: "He did not pass
here" •...
You had no contacts with Levin, but you did have contacts with
him through Bakayev. Bakayev travelled on your instructions.
Consequently, when you said: "I did not give him any instructions," you lied again!
Bakayev was oot the only one to carry out your instructions.
All of you-both Kamenev and Zinoviev, as well as the whole
of your centre, carried on negotiations with Levin, Kotolynov,
Nikolayev, Rumyantsev, Sossi&sky, Mandelstamm and a number
of other members of this gang of Leningrad Zinovievitcs, which
has now been broken up and destroyed. The whole of your centre
chL-cked up on the progress being made by the Leningrad gang of
Zinovievites in preparing for this crime; and you wai!Pd imp:itiently
for the time when at last that loyal son of om· Party, the leader or
the Leningrad BolsheYiks and fiery tribune, Sergei Mironovich
146

Kirov, would be destroyed. And they lived to \See this murder
committed.
In this Court Zinoviev admitted that he was pressing to hasten
murder. He was in a hurry, he clutched feverishly at people
like Nikolayev and Kotolynov in order to hasten this murder. Not
the least motive was the desire to forestall the Trotskyite terrorists.
The Trotskyites were pressing hard.
Zinoviev admitted that Smirnov was also hurrying. They were
all hurrying. The Trotskyites operated with greater determination
and energy than the Zinovievites . .Zinoviev knew that Trotskyit<:
terrorists were arriving from abroad. And Zinoviev declared that
it was a "matter of honour"-! am ashamed to use such a word
in this connection-to carry out his crin1inal design sooner than
the Trotskyites ! Hence Zinoviev's feverish impatience. That is why
he was waiting every day for the moment when that treacherous
shot would at last be fired in Leningrad. All his activities were
directed towards committing this foul crime as soon, as swiftly
and as successfully as possible!
Such was the role played by Zinoviev, such was his conduct
in this affair.
In finishing wi·th this episode, I would like now to get a straight
answer from Zinoviev to the following question: Does Zinoviev
now accept only moral responsibilfty, or the whole eriminal 'l'e·
sponsibility, full responsibility, for preparing, organizing and committing the murder of Sergei Mironovich Kirov?
Of course, Zinoviev will say "yes." He cannot say anything
else. He said this on the very ·first day of this trial when caught in
the grip of the iron chain of evidence and proof.
At that same trial Kamenev took an almost similar stand. Baka·
yev took a .similar stand. Kamenev said that he did not know of thl'
existence of the Moscow centre. Trying to pose as a noble person,
he said that in so·far as the cen~e existed, and this W2S proved.
he was responsible for it. . . .
1 The way Kamenev put it, it amounted to this: he did not know
there was a centre, but if there was a centre, well then, he knew
about it. But Kanwnev did know of the existence of the centre; he
indeed knew. This has been proYed. And now this is corroborated
by fresh evidence obtained in connection with the discovery of n
147

number of new criminal gangs operating in the same direction.
This evidence throws full light on this' ghastly and terrible affair.
And .then Kamenev tried to pose as a man who had become
politically blind. He said: I became blind-I lived to the age of
.50 and did not see this centre in which, it hims out, I myself was
active, in which I participated by action and by inactio~ by speech
and by silence.
It sounds like some sort of spirituali51ll, spiritualism and black
magic!
Even at. that finie we realized that this was simply an attempt
at t'-Oncealment by means of false phrases, an attempt by mean~
of these false phrases to conceal the truth. Now all this has been
finally expo~ed. No, Kamenev did not become blind. Kamenev
very well saw and knew what he was doing. He saw perfectly
well what was going on around him, because he organized what
was going on around him. Kamenev did not become blind, becau5e
he acted by speech and silence. By silence when he did not say:
"Don't do that," when he should have said that; and by speech
when he saia: "Do it," when, perhaps, some of his young~r, ~s­
sistants wavered -and turned to him as t'beir authority, a~. their
mentor.
Kamenev said:
"I want to say-not in my own justification, I did not remember
this before _but now I recall-that some time ago Zinoviev told me
that Safarov had visited him and had proposed some sort of a
bloc. I said that I would not take part in any bloc because I never
believed that man. Zinovie'i can confirm Urls. I was not opposed
to falling. I talked."
With whom did he talk?
"With Tolmazov and -Shatsky." Tolnrnzov and Shaisky were
active membei;s of the Leningrad Zinovievite gang which killed
Comrade Kirov.
Kamenev talked with Tolmazov and Shatsky, that is to say, with
two of the principal organi1ers of the murder of Comrade Kirov.
So Kamenev agreed to these conversations and carried them on
through Ilakayev. But he tried to conceal this.
Arguing that he could not have any connection with terrorism,
Kamenev, striking a pose, said: '
148

"I must say that I am not a coward by uature, but I never
banked on fighting with arms. I always expected that a .simation
would arise in which ilhe Central Committee would be compelled to
negotiate with us, that it woUld move up and make room for us....
These dreams did not recur during the past two years, sunply be·
cause I am not a dreamer and not a fantast. There were fantasts and
adventurers in our midst, but I do not belong to that category."
I think that Kamenev will now define his part in this affair
somewhat differently. What aim did KameneY set himself? Did he
or did he not bank on fighting with arms?
At that time he said-" No." Now;two days ago, he said-"Yes;,.
At that time he said "no" because he knew, }le saw that we
were as yet not in possession of all the threads of this ghastly crime,
because at that stage of the investigation all the threads bad not yet
been finally unravelled. At "tliat time he said: "No." Now when
everything has been disclosed, he says-"yes."
Jfere is a characteristic fact! It shows what a great and' decisive
role pe~sonal _!11.0tives played in this criminal "work" of Kamenev.
Kwnenev thought that a time must arrh:e when the Central Com·
mittee would move up and make room for him. But suppose it did
not move up? Suppose it did not make room for him? In that case
he, Kamenev, WQU}d take measures to have room made for him.
This is the whole of Kamenev's logic and politics! LOgiC and
politics which make it utterly impossible for us to agree that he
does not beiong to the category of people whom he himself described as adventurers. No. Obviously he belongs to this category,
as well as to the other category-the "fantasts." There was not a
little of fantasy here, but there was plenty of willingness lo put
thjs fantasi iii.to practice, to make it real, to make it a living thing
even by means of adventures, by means of a bloc with spies, agents
for diversive activities, secret police agents, murderers, u>i! by direct murders. K811llenev agreed to this, iKainenev was p.repa.red
rto do this.
Here is something else be said at the Leningrad trial: "! am
speaking before the portraits of th~e great bWlden ·of social·
ism. . . ." It must be s8id that among these there was. a. porinit
framecr in .black.: the portrait of "Comrade K~v. KIUMlleV at the
119

trial vowed· before the porlrai.t of Kfrov, whom: K'imenev had murd.ered! ". • • Before the portraits of these great builders of socialism l
am a c:riminal if I lacked the strength ro leave and to take with me
those ;v~ i,t was .possible to take. • . ."
Lies-l Again :hypocrisy, cwming, perfidy and cynicism!

Tli'4f! T1otskyite-Zinovievite Centre Killed Comrade Kirov
Above I asked: Was i'here an organization? Was there a Trotskyif.f>-Zioovievi<t,e terrorist centre? I ans~r: Y~. there was. It arose
iJi- 193~. ll wnsisted af Kamenev, Zinoviev, Evdokimov, Ba.kayev,
&imn;.~. Ter-V~-,.an .aOO Mracli:kov~y.
This,,i:e£!:i;e existed, and, what is most important, it was formed
QJl ~e _~ect i~ctions of ~ky, Zinoviev and Ka:m.enev. It
was formed on the d.iretj: insl:Tuctions of Trotsky to adopt terror
ll~;~-- ;mei;bod of'.~~ a@tlnst the leaders of the land ~f
~~~as foI'µ3,ed on the basis of prof.ound and strict secrecy.
Y~y w~ w,e1·e ·able to observe o_ne·of-t11e representatives Of
this Trot.s!l-y-'Z4ioviev-E:amenev school of conspiracy in the person ¥, th~ ~cused Holtzm211. fa the dock we have another con~
spirator in .the person of Smirnov. The centre existed and functioned: it not oniy resorted to met.l-i®s of downriglit ~i'fidy, deceit and
treachery but, as has now been definitely established, it orga!)ized
and ~_tablished secret communications with the Gennan fascists?
with whom ~t mated the German Trotskyites; using them in the
fight against oilr leaders, using thek connections with the Getman
Gestapo in the persons of Tukalevsky, P. Olberg and their like.
I fake it as absolutely proven by the personal evidence of litert
aBy all the .accused, including that of Suiirnov on thi~oint, that
this centre w~s organized on a terroristic basis, that the centre
resorted to terroriStic methods, not shrinking from the most sordid
and cynical methods in its struggle. I take it as absolutely· proven
that this centre prepared a number of·terroristic attempts-in the
Ukraine, in Moscow and in Leningrad. Fhlally, this centre pl"epared and ~erll the murder of Se-.rgei .Mironovich Kirov ill
Leningrad.
A.a I M'll$ llll£-eady said. ~ immier of Sei'g@i MironbviCh KirOT

-

the *4tdei'$ of
fhe Soviet state and the G.P.S.U. Incidentaily, this.has biit!n eslablishe!l by the evidence of Evdokimov. I ask the <:ourt to tii!ke ~t~
of Evdokimov's testimony of AUg;ust 10, when be. said 'that
murder of Kirov was committed on t11e direct ·mstructions"i'>f th~
uni~ed centre of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite. bloc, When he'':Said
th.at in 1984' Zino...iev gave him direct instru.ctrens ·to this ~Ct;
Bakay.ev also corroborated this. The decisfon to orgmuze the mtirder of Kirov was adopted by Zinoviev, Kamenev, EvdOklmO-V and
Bakayev, filld by Trotsky's representatives, MrachkovSky and TetVaganyan.
Evdokimov's .evidence, to which I now refer, reads as follows:
"For th,e .purpo8e of prei)a:i:ing for the murder, Baka~~.WlllJ 'Sent
to Leningrad at the heginnillg of No\.emher 1984, thaf h. to say,
:iome· days bef0re Nikolayev <killed Kirov iii the 'SmOhly; in the' city
Of Leningrad-to dieck up Viii the preparations for tins· mtlrder.
Bab.yev perllQliaDy met Nikoiilyev and· on 'returning to M:Osc:OW informed Evdokimov, zmoviev and Xamen~ Of this; The :fatter
~ot~d. ·with satisfaction. the·.~uooessful progress -Of~ prepamtiont>
for this foul crime and began to wait for the shot. Bakayev Wnrt\Eil
)iiko13~ev .and his acoo-plicei;; that they must wait for ZinoviCv·s
signal, that they must fire simultaneously with the shot~ to be
fired in Moscow and KieY."
AH thms has no~ been proved by the trial. Let the accused
challenge tills in their defenee speeches if they dare.
. After pmlonged denials during ui.e preliminary· investigation
Zinov-iev gaYe the evidence which· I· have already mentioned. A
characteristic detail. As far back as the autumn of 1932, in Zinoviev's and Kaimenev's ·summer villa (they jointly occupied a
summer '111a which, incidentally, Kamenev once called the source
of his misfortunes) Bakayev was instructed to prepare· a terroristic act agl!;inst Comrade Stalin; and Karev was instructed to prepare one' against Comrad~ Kirov. But then the situation changed,
for Karev was arrested and Kamenev and Zin6viev found them-

W8.5 part·of the coDSpirafors'. general i)lail 'to iJJ:arder

the

selves iii·eii1e.

came

IJ'hen
1983, the yell!' of revival uf terroristte sentiments,
the year of resumption 'of aetiVitles by the 'Trotskyite-Zmoorievite
centre. ·And.. now; Bakayev is given ·mstnietions; and ttior0ugh
if6t

preparations for the m~er of Comrade Kirov are begun.
Kamenev says: "I did not know these preparations proceeded
in practice because it was not l, but ZinoYiev who .exercised prac·
tical direction in the organization of this terroristic act." Accused
Kamenev, did you know that Bakayev went to Leningrad ro check
up on the progres,c; of these preparations? Yes, you lmrw. J)id you
know that Bakayev:, after having checked up and found that every•
thing was going on successfully, arrived in Moscow and reported
to you the progress of these preparations? You knew . How, after
this, can y~u presume to say that you took no pra.ctical part in
the murder of Kirov? Your attempt to throw all the blame on
Zinoviev will n-0t hold water.
.Kamenev says "it was decid~'.' to kill, and adds "I agret,>d to
iliis decision." Is this not taking practical steps?
At the preliminary investigation Bakayev persistently denied
that he had· played any part in the preparations for the murder
of Kirov; bu,t he was exposed by -Karev, who reminCkd :him, of a
number oi facts. A.'ld only then, after that, did Ilakayev confess.
That is why, in view of Bakayev's full confession, J. refrained from
ex·ami11ing Karev in Cow::t..
It_ was the hand_ of Nikola,yev, of Kotolynov,- of his group fb.at
murdered Sergei Mironovich Kirov. But who else took part in this
murder? I asked Zinoviev: Wihen was the united centre organiZed?
Zinovrev replied: In the summer of 1932. During what period of
time did it function? Zinoviev: Practically up to 1934. . . .
I would like to deal with this question in greater detail. In
1932-33 Kamenev and Zinoviev were in exile; but the centre func·
tioned. It is known that in 1934 Smirnov, too, was not at liberty;
he was arrested in January 1933; but !he centre functioned. And
Zinoviev confirms that the centre functioned. I. draw the· conclu·
sion that if ihe centre functioned it was because of the well-organized technique of communication which enabled even those who
were not at liberty, Smirnov, for example, to take part in guiding
the work of this centre.
I know that in his defence Smimov will argue that he had left
the centre. Smimov will say: "I did not do anytl\ing, I was in
prison." A naive assertion! Smirnov was in prison from January 1,
1933, but we know that while in ptjson Smimov organized con·
152

.

tacts with his Th'otskyites, for a code was discovered· by means
of which Smimov, while in ·prison, communicated with his companions outside. This proves that communicati<m existed and
Smim<>v cannot deny this.
But even this does not settle the question because,. after all,
what is important for us is that Smirnov, like 7..inoviev and Kamenev, is responsible for all the centre's activities and for the ac.
tiVlities of the whole of the terrorist group which was organized,
built up and· functioned under his leadership when they were still
at liberty. Smirnov, Zinoviev and Kamenev .were the organizers uf
the centre; they directed the activities of their terrorists, of all thesePickels, the Dreitzers and the rest. And they must bear full respon ·
sibility for this, krespecliive of whether any one of them was at liberty at the time or not. This is elementary, and I do not ih&ik it is
necessary to deal with it in detail. As the leaders, they must an~
swer for the whole of the criminal activities of the organization
iwhich they led and of all those groups which sprang up on the soil
they plowed.
Wlhat did the activities of the centre ·consi!>t of? Zinoviev
said: "Their principill activities consisted in the preparati<>ns
of terroristic acts against tihe leaders of 'the Party and the
Government." I asked: against whom? Zinoviev answered:
against the leaders. I asked: that is to say, against Stalin, Vor·
oshifov and Kaganovich? Was it your centre that organize:l
the murder of Kirov? Was the murder of Sergei Mironovich
Kirov organized by your centre, or by some other organization?
Zinoviev: Yes, by our-~ntre.
I asked: Did this centre comprise you, Kamenev, Smirnov,
Mrachkovsky and Ter-Vaganyan?
Zinoviev: Yes.
To my question: .So y0u organized the murder of Kirov?
Zinovi_ev replied: Yes.
.A!lld so it is Zinoviev, Kamenev, Smirnov, Mraohkovsky;
Ter-Vaganyan and all the rest who must anBwer for this. crime.
The most persistent !in his denials is Smirnov. He pleaded
guilty only to being the leader of the Trotskyite underground
counter-revolutionary cerive. '!,'rue, he said this in a somewhat
jocular way. Turning to 'I,'er-Vaganyan; Mrachk,ovsky and Dreitz-

·'tA

er, he said to them: "You want a leader? Well, take me." But
you, accused Smirnov, were the leader. Smirnov was the leader
of the Trotskyite underground organization. It was no accident
that Zinoviev and Kamenev regarded him as Trotsky's repre.Sentative,_as Trotsky's deputy, as the actual leader of the whole
o.f the Trotskyite underground organization. And finally he
himSelf confessed to this.
I do not know what Smirnov is going to say in his last
plea; but I think that on the basis of the material· of the preliminary investigation and of the material of the court
vestigation I have every ground for declaring the following: 1)
the areu8ed Sm!rnov has confessed that for a number o.f years
be .w~ the actual :leader ~f the Trotskyite ~rground organization; 2) he ihas confessed that·he was Trotsky's represent.alive and deputy in the U.S.S.R.; 3) he has confessed that he
·was in Berlin. in 1931 and there met Sedov; and 4) he has
confessed that Sedov informed! him of the terroristic tasks and
gave the terroristic directions.
It is true that Smirnov denies that these. were Trotsky's directions. He says that this was Sedov's "personal opinion." Nevertheless, on returning to the U.S.S.R., he considered it necessary to
communicate Sedov's "person:tl opinion" to his companions
in the underground orga:iiization. . . .
We asked him: Where is the logic of this? If this was Sedov's personal opinion, and moreover, an opinion with which
Smirnov, as he asserted, did not agree, why communicate it to
the other members of the underground organization? Commu-,
nicate it and not say that he did not agree wil!h it? All his·
companions in the counter-revolutionary underground organization declare that he did not even hint at his disagreement with this line. Under these circumstances, what can we
regard as estahlishe<!? Was there a meeting with Sedov in 1931?
There was. Is Sedov-the son of L. TrotSky-his closest and
first assistant in all. his political activities? He is. During this
meelling, did Se!die>v talk to Smirnov? He did. Smirnov admits
this. Did they talk about terror? Yes, they tailked about terror.
Smirno~ admits this too. The q11estion as to how Smirnov understood Sedov is after all .a matter of complete indifference
164

in-

to Pie proseeution. ·If Smirnov undei-stOOd! his conversation witb.
Sedov not as an instruction, then there was no need for him to
communicate it to ihis <XJ<lleagues in ihi.s underground .group. If
he communicated this conversation and did not · say that he
disagreed with it, it means that it was an instructigQ, and it
could n<Jt be otherwise.
Smimov Siys that he did not <agree with ttiis instnQltion. !Jut
if he did not agree wfth lilt he, as a ·sufficiently Gperien~ 1111derground WOl"ker,. fadionalist and eounter-tevohltionary, ~
have uiuierstood that .it w:as his duty ~ break Wilih this ·groap,
to leave :this gr-OUp; Othenrise be would not be a man eng~· in
politics, let alone a leader of an n!ideI"ground organi.zatio:it Vet
SinirnOv was not merely a rank-ana"file member of the Tr'flSk~
group. Smirnov is not HG\tzman. Holtzman is a poor edftion' cf
Smirnov; but Smirnov is not Holtzman. Smimov ·is ~.:Ho
is the leader. How cim the leader remain. a memhet.- •uf lli1ia
underground group When he disagrees w:iilh the ·mam tine oftbii
group? And the main line of this group was terrorism. Alld if
he says that in 1931 he did no~ aceept, Wlbat Sedlov said. as instruction, but took it merely as Sed<>v's personai opinion; ia
1932, however, he received d~rect instructions .from Trotsky
through Yuri Gaven. At tihat time he could no longer say that
this was somebody's "personal opinion," for even if it reaB~
was a "personal" position, it was the position
'haisleyl ..
From Sedov's personal position a straight path leads to
Trotsky's position.. There are no personal posiitionsl There is
the. Trotskyite decision, Trotsky's line of terrorism. You, Smirll<OV, received it in 1931' and in 1932. You also received
instruction froni. Dreitzer, not personally, but I iim. deeply· ·eoavinced that you knew about it notwithstanding the fact that yoo
were in a house of detention for political offenders.
·• ·
In 1932 you received Trotsky's instmcti<>n 'through Ga~
Trotsky plainly siiid:-:Terror; put Stalin out of the wa,-i; km
Voroshilov; kill the i.tiaders of the Party lllld the goven:imftt;
You, Smimov, recehe\ii"thjs instruction. Yoa say: I reoeiwlil·tt;.
but did not accept ·ii: '!If 'YOU d!id :oot aeeept it; and if ,.oa .·p-e11erved a·~ el ~-honesty to my degree,· ·after ~
Writ· in 1982 "T~·s tnstnietk>a · aient- te yilu ·thrua-~-

07.

the

'IN

you could not but break with the Trotskyite organization. You
unoQer.s.tand this, and it.bat is why you say-I broke, I left. But
whom did you tell that you had~? You told no one. Mracht..
kClv~y. did not know albout it, Ter-Vaganyan did not know
about it and even Safonova did not know about it. You did not
tell anyone! No one knew!
Consequently, we have no right whatever to believe these
assertions ·of yours. We can assert that ini 1932 you received instructions .on terrorim>. from Trotsky and! you accepted them.
You w'o1!_ld not be the Smirnov you are if you remained in the
Trotskyite group while disagreeing with the fundamental line of
this group, while disagreeing ~ith the line of the man who was
such ~- authority for you as was TrotSlky. We know th.at in
your defence speech you will curse Trotsky. But no one will
hellieve you, because in th.is Court you have not said, .ar..d! you
di) not want to say, even. two words of tnith about your work
in the terrorist cenll"e. Even yesterday you wanted to co~al
the roJie played by Putna. YOU wanted! to save some reserV:e!f;
who, perhaps, would npt be entirely ex.poSed. Yau wanted to
save reserves for Trotsly, for :your accl,U'sed Trotskyite· underground organization!
I think th.at all the circumstances I have mentioned permit
\.lS to establish the following in regard 'lo Smirnov.
F1irst. Smirnov ·was a member of the· united centre of the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist organization. This centre was
or.ganized with his participation. Consequently, he is one of
the most important organizers of the centre.
Second. He organizedl this centre on the basis of Trotsky'.s
instructions which he received in 1931. He gave this centre its .terroristic character and the terroristi-c direction of its activities.
Third. In 1932, Smirnov received a second instruction rfrom
Trotsky. 'Ibis is indli.sputably established. All Smirnov's attempts to prove that, having received this instruction, he dlid
not agree with it, althougih he remained in the ranks of .the
Trotskyite underground organization,,are too transparent.
Comrades judges, there is one other very important circumstance. The question can be put tn this way: All ri~ht, terroristic
ba,sjs, disposition towards terrorisJll, talk about terror being the
1q6

.so..le means-but what about the organization of practical measures for the purpoee O!f getting togeilher terrorist groups, for
the purpose of putting terrorism into practice?
Ter-Vagm1:i-~n said that work was 1:2rried on to get together terrorist groups, hut that this was prei)aratory wvrk
which <lid not go beyond the limi.ts of preparatioP..s. But was that
really the case?_
Of course not. The Zinovievites followed the Trotskyites,
and Smirnov in particular, who persuasively and fervently insisted on the eaTl-iest application <Of terror, ai>.d not terro; in
genera~, but terror against Comrades Stalin, Kirov, ·voroshilov,'
and other of our leaders. It was Comrade Stalin and Comrade
Ki.'"<lv who -had smashed! this :dishonest opposition-. It ise quite
ul;,~~rstanooble, therefore, th-at Smirnov, this consistent, folly
cenvinced · and irre·wncilable Trotskyite, should concentrate all
his· organizing aibilities on preparing the assassination first oi all
of the leaders of the Central Collllmitt-ee of our Party, the lead·
e:rs of our country. Smirnov kept urging Z-inoviev: Let us hurry
up and commit a terroristic act, let us hurry up and k.iil.l Stalin,
Kirov and Voroshilov. And Zinoviev, !hurrying at the heels of the
Tmts:kyites is ful1l of exeitement and agitation fearing lest he
lag behind. . . .
Smirnov urged Zinoviev to hurry up wiLii the muroer. He
was in no hurry _about a platf~rm. He said: It coul-d. he drawn
up .at one sitting. What dJid they want a pilatf~rm for when they
had wh-at in their opinion was a surer mear>...s-assassination!
Smimov tlrew up a:ndl placed in the hands of ms agents a concrete plan for the organization of terroristic acts. The murder of
_Comrade Kirov was carried out in fulfilment of this plan, for
which Z.inoviev as wel[ as Kam-enev, Smirnov, Mrachkovsky and
Ter-Vaganyan must bear "full responsibility before tthe land
of Soviets, before tlie Soviet people, before the Soviet p1'0letarian Court.

The Masks Are Torn From the Accused
consider that the guilt of Zinoviev, Kamenev, Evdokimov
and Ba!rnyev has been fuJ.ly established, and that I can he re157

lie'ffdc of the duty of enumerating the many facts, and of analysing the material .of the Court investigation, which exposes them
to the fullest degree. I merely want Ito emphasize that by the
side of Zinoviev, Kamenev., Evdokimov and Bakayev should
stand Smirnov, Ter-Vaganyan and Mrachkovsky. 'Ilhey ought
to stand side by side. Together they directed their criminal activities against our government, ·together they murdered Kirov
and, therefore, together and fuliy must they answer for this.
Smirnov understands this :perfectly well, and: that is why
he. adopted a position of denial. At first he denied everything:
he denied the existence of a Trotskyite organization, !be denied
the existence of a centre, <he denied his participation in .the
centre. he denied connection with ·Trotsky, he denied that he
gave any secret instructi~ns, even those which he gave in 1936,
and we know that this .great conspirator managed! . to organize
the communication of criminal instructions to ih.i.s adherents even.
while he was isolated. He denied everythil;tg-he denied the
e~istence of the Trotskyite centre in 1931, he denied the existence of such ·a centre in 1932. He denied everything. The whole
of his· examination of May 20 consisll:ed solcly of the wordis: "I
deny that, again I deny, I deny." That is. the only tlhing deft
:for him to do.
Accused Smirnov, your experience, your sJcil:l in deeeit, has
betrayed you. Exposed by the evidence of Safonova, Mracllkovsky and Ter-Vaganyan, you were compelled to admit that there
was a centre; that yQU were a member of this centre. Your
denf.als were of no avail. YOU denied that you had received any
instructions on terrorism, but you were exposed on this mattg: by
Gaven, and you confessed;· you were exposed by Holtzman:-who
received instrudions from Trotsky to be conveyed to you personally, and only to you, in.structioillS to· the effect that it was now
necessary to adopt terrorism. Holtzman, whose Twtskyite allegiance was kept a particularly profound secret, said that he had
received these instructions, but did not communicate them; and you
think that this can be believed. No, no one will believe this.
Holtzman adopted· the same position as Smirnov-I admit
everything except terrorism-because he knows that for terrorism he may have to pay with his head. Smirnov was exposed as a
158

terrorist ·by Holtzman, by Mrachkovsky, by Safonova and by
Dreitzer.
On July 21, you, Smirnov, gave somewhat different evidence,
that iis ·to say, at first you denied that you had received any
instructions from Trotsky to organize terrorism, but here you
admitted that you did receive them. Your ®nials ·came to
nought.
When confronted with Mrachkovsky, you continued to deny
that you had received from Trotsky and conveyed to Mrachkovsky instructions to organize a terrorist group. M.rachkovsky
put· you to sha~ iby saying: "Why, Ivan Nikitich, you want
to get out of a sordid h'loodly business with a clean shirt?". I
can repeat this: "Do you•really think, accused Smi:rnov, that
you will get out of this bloody business· unS<;aihed?" In reply
to Mrachkovsky you said: "Invention and slander," but later
you did confess to something.
You admitted that the bloc was organized on the principle of the necessity of terrorism, and therefore you were one
of the organizers of 11he terrorist centre. You received instructions on teri:or from Trotsky. On that basis you developed! terroristic criminal activi.ties. True, y<Jlllr arrest hindered you somewhat from taking part lin the carrying out of these :wthiiies;
nevertheless you did. all you p%sibly could to help these activities.
I want to remind you that the confrontation with Safoll'O'l'a
during the prelimi.riary investigation, wlhich, in the main repro:
duced what we saw in this Court, was very characteristic. Smirno'v does not venture to deny Safonov.a's evidence. He invents
an elastic form of lies. He knows that Safonova wil[ not slander
him, Safonova was formerly his wife, and has no personal
grudge .against him; therefore, he cannoit plead a ;personal
grudge. He says: "I do not remember," "evidently such a conversation may have taken place." He is asked: Was there any
talk about organizing terrorism? He replies: "Th~re was not,
but there might have been." When now, masking himself, he
says: "I have nO<lhing to reply to that," he is guided 'by the
&ame animal cowardice. But on August 13 he was compelled
to admit that this conversation did take pl.ace in 1982, tliat he,
159

Smirn<>v, bears fuil responsibility for this, mid that now ihe
does not intend to evade responsibility.
I now want to deail with Ter-Vaganyan. He, too, at first,
adopted a position of denial; but on August .l4 he gave more
tru~ul evidence. Summing up his testimony and his behaviour
in Court we can draw several definite deductions: we may consider it established that Ter-Vaganyan was a membe_r of the
Tiou-kyite-ZinovieYite centre, that he took an active part in organizing :the centre, that he carried out the instructions of
the centre on the basis af Trotsky's instructions which were
received through Smimov, .and of which he learned from Smfrnov. He tries to ru;sert that actually he dad nothing. But I must
say beforehand mat even if he "di'tl nothing," what he did
~s ss.llfident to dE!Si!rve the penalty pi"Ovided for in Arts. 588 ,
19 .and 586 , 58" of the Crimillal Codie.
Moissei Lurye and Nathan Lurye. We have heard Nathan
Lu...rye's ev:id<>...z:ce of ihow he arrived here and for what purpose,
of the work he can-ied on in preparation for terroristic acts under
the guidance of Moissei Lurye, of how, in fact, he was practically
the su~essor to the group which had been gotten together !here
before him by Franz Weitz, the fascist agent and a trusted man of
Himmler, chief of the fascist black secret servree, chief of the
German S. S. detachments and. subsequently, chief of the German Gestapo.
You remember all their evidence, and I dJo not think it is
necessary to de:d with it in detail. It has been fu1ly, categoric'
ally, and unquestionably proved that Nathan Lurye and Moissei
Lurye prepared ,to commit terroristic acts. They must bear full
responsibiljty for this crime!
-:-~
When'°-I spoke of the . methQds by which these gen·tlemen
operated I showed, tried to show, to what depths these people
had .sunk, morally and politically. And perhaps one of the
most striking and characteristic proofs of the depths of moral
turpitude to which these -people have sunk, of their lack of
even those "moral" principles and rules of conduct by which
even hardened criminals and gangsters are guided, is what Reingold told us about here. I refer to their plan to remove the
traces of their foul crimes.
160

Was it an accident, comrades judges, that they, in expeetation
<>f successfully carrying out their heinous plan, intended to ap-

point none other than Bakaye•· as chairman of the O.G.P.U.precisely Bakayev. who fa known as a man filled with malicious
hatred, as a resolute man, persevering and persistent, with a
very· strong will, strong character and stamina, who would not
stop at anything to achieve the aims which he had set himself!
If some of the accused coolly planned to come to power over
>mountains of corpses of the best people of our Soviet land, then
Bakayev was perhaps the most determined and most implacable
executor of this plan I It is precisely this man that they intended
to appoint as chairman of the O.G.P.U. in the event of their plot
·being successful.
I will not deal with the ludicrous distribution of portfolios
·among the conspirators and terrorists. I merely emphasize once
again that none other than Bakayev was intended for the post
of chairman of the 0.G.P.U. Zinoviev and Kamenev did not
·-exclude the possibility that the O.G.P.U. was in possession of the
threads of the plot that they were hatching against the state, ..and,
ther~fore, they considered i.t to be one of their most important
tasks to appoint Bakayev chairman of the O.G.P.U. He was to
.obtain possession of all these threads and then destroy them, as
wen ·as the very people who carried out Zinoviev's and Kamenev's
instructions.
Kamenev and Zinoviev do not deny the first part of this, but
they deny the second part. That seoond ipart is too ghastly, and
2;inoviev said it was taken from Jules Verne. But do we not know
tb1:1t there have been such examples in history? Do we not know
~rtain neighbouring states in wh~ch sqch procedure has been
,applied, where participants in a plot were physically exterminated
:by the .hand of the organiz_ers of the plot, as was the case with
Roeh~- and his henchmen?
Accused Zinoviev, you yourself say that it was intended to
appoint Bakayev to the post of chairman of the O.G.P.U. in order
to use him for the purpose of removing the traces of your erime.
~.hy, then, do you say this is from Jules Verne? You have ch<lsen
;a. faulty .line of defence.
161

This is not very important for the case; but that is not the
question, that is not the point. This is one of the remarkable
touches which characterize the people who aspired to the leadership of our· country. It proves how fortunate we are that they
were removed from this leadership in time!
Zinoviev and Kamenev call this fantastic tales from the
Aratbian Nights. But, by your leave, what about the murder
of Zinoviev's secretary Bogdan? What is that? A tale? Zinovie\·
could not say anything about that; but Reingold re\realed it and
Pickel confirmed it.
Zinoviev recommended Bogdan to Bakayev as a suitable person to commit terroristic acts.
Reingold said it, Pickel confirmed it, but Bakayev v.igorously
denies it and tries to escape from it. But it is a fact which nobody
can escape. Reingold and Pickel have proved that Bogdan's "suicide" was really murder. It was done by Eakayev on the instructions of the united centre! "You are hesitating to carry out tb~
instructions of our united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre? Kill
yourself or else we will ikill you." That is what Bakayev said to
Bogdan, and Bogdan gave way. ·
This was the beginning of the execution of the plan drawn
up by Zinoviev and Kamenev that was to be carried out in the
event of the terroristic plot turning out successful. Zinoviev a1ul
Kamenev tried to depict Bogdan's suicide as the fate of a ''victim"
of our Soviet regime. But you yourselves drove Bogdan to suicide
by <.-olllfronting hini with the dilemma: either to carry out a terroristic act or to cmmuit suicide.
Comrades judges, if you link up this episode with all the
methods of struggle, all the other methods of "work" adopted
by this criminal gang, you will easily understand the truthfulness of the evidence given by Reingold and Pickel, who in
this Court again and again exposed Zinoviev, Kamenev and
Evdoklmo\• as the perpetr:~iors of a number of grave crimes.
Dog., Gone Mad Should All Be Shot

I now conclude, comrades judges. The last hour is approaclting, the hour of reckoning for these people who have committed
162

grave crimes against our great country. It is the last hour of
reckoning for these people who took up arms against our dearest
and most beloved, against the belove~ leaders of our Party and
our country, against Stalin, Kaganovich, Voroshilov, Orjonikidze,
Zhdanov, Postyshev, Kossior and other leaders of our land of
victorious, growing and flourishing, new, socialist society. A sad
and shameful end awaits these people who were once in our
ranks, although they were never distinguished for either staunchness or loyalty to the cause of socialism.
Just a few words more. Some of the accused tried to draw
a parallel with the historical past, with the period of the
Narodnaya Volya. They tried to compare some people with the
heroic terrorists who in the last century entered into combat with
the terrible, cunning and ruthlessly cruel enemy, the tsarist
government. In speaking of Bakayev, or perhaps of Smirnov, the
name of Gershuni was mentioned here. This argument does not
hold water.
That was a struggle waged by a handful of self-sacrificing
enthusiasts against the gendarme giant; it was a fight in the
interests of the people. \Ve Bolsheviks have always opposed
terrorism, but we must pay our tribute to the sincerity and
heroism of the members of the N'arodnaya Volya. Gershuni was
not a Bolshevik, but he, too, fought against tsarism and not
against the people.
You, however, a handful of downright counter-revolutionaries.
representatives of the vanguard of the . international counterrevolution, you took up arms against the vanguard of the world
proletarian revolution! You took up arms against the liberty and
happiness of the peoples. The comparison with the period of
Narodnaya Volya terrorism is shameless. Filled with respect for
the memory 6f those who in the times of the Narodnaya Volya
sincerely-- and honestly, although employing, it is true, their own
special, but always irreproachable methods, fought- against th<'
tsarist autocracy for liberty-I emphatically reject this sacrilegious parallel. I repeat, this parallel is out of place here. Before
us a-re criminals, dangerous, hardened, cruel and ruthless towards
our people, towards our ideals, towards the leaders of our
163

skuggle, the leaders of the land of Soviets, the leaders of the
toilers of the whole world!
The enemy is cunning. A cunning enemy must not be spared.
.The whole people rose to its feet as soon as these ghastly crime~
became known. The whole people is quivering with indignation
and I, as the representative of the state prosecution, join my anger,
.the indignant voice of the state prosecutor, to the rumbling of the
voices of millions!
I want to conclude by reminding :you, comrades judges, of
those demands which the law makes in cases of the gravest crimes
.against th~ state. I take the liberty of reminding you that it is
your duty, once you find these people, all sixteen of them,
guilty of crimes against the state, to apply to them in full measure
·those articles of the law which have been preferred against them
by the prosecution.
· I demand that dogs gone mad should be shot-every one
of them!

164

AUGUST 22 (EVENING SESSION)
After the opening of the evening session the President of thr.
Court Comrade Ulrich addresses each of the accused, granting
them the floor for their speeches of defence, since they refused
counsel of defence. All the accused in turn tell. the Court that they,
will not make their speeches of defence, giving as the reason that.
they wlill avail themselves of their right of the last plea. A number
of the accused emphasize that they do not regard themselves entitled to defence" as they reco,,anize the correctness of the charges
made against them.
After a short recess the Court commences the hearing -of the,
last pleas of the accused.
The first to speak is Mrachkovsky.
The accused Mmcll]\.ov.sky starts his last plea by relating bis
autOlbiography. Then he goes on to say:
"In 1923 I became a Trotskyite. I took a despicable path, the
path of deception of the Party. We must cross out past services; the
past does not -exist. But the present· cannot be crossed out. I am a
counter-revolutionary. '. . .
"I do not ask for mitigation of my punishment," con~ues
Mrachkovsky. "I do not want that. I want to be believed that during the investigation and in court I told the whole truth. I want to
depart from life without carrying any filth with me.
"Why did I take the counter-revolutionary path?" says MrachkoYskY further. "My connection with Trotsky-that is what
brought me to this; it is from that time on that I began to deceive
the Party, to deceive its leaders. Some may say: 'The Party gave no
help; it might have been possible perhaps to wrest the fellow from
counter-revolution and save him, but the Party took no measures.'.
That would not be true. The Party did all it could to tear me away
from counter-revolution. The Party helped me and helped me a
great deal.
165

"l L.'J.ink I have said everything," says Mrachkovsky in conclusion. "Let everybody remember that not o.uly a general, not only
a prince or nobleman can become a counter-revolutionary; workers or those who spring from the working, class, like myself, can
also become counter-revolutionaries.
"I depart as a traitor to my Party, as a traitor who should be
shot. All I a:sk is that I be believed when I say that during the investigation I spat out all this vomit."

*

*

"Who will !believe a single word of ours?" asks Evdokime>v in
opening his last plea, "Who will believe us, who played so
detestable a comedy at the fresh grave of Kirov whom we had
killed; who will believe us, who only by accident, not through aay
fault of our own, did nm become tihe assassins of Stalin and other
leaders of ihe people?Whowiil believe us, whoa:re facing the Court
as a counter-revolutionary gang of bandits, as allies of fascism,
of the GestS:po? Did the heart of even a single one of us, who were
convicted in the last year's trial of the Zinovievitcs in Leniugrad,
shudder at the thought of our accomplices rcmail\ing at liberty,
knowing as we did, although in prison, that any day, any hour,
another dastardly shot may he fired? Not one of us did what he
should have done had we !been bound by the thinnest of threads
to the cause of the revolution.
"The difference between us and the fascists is very-much in
our disfavour. Fascism openly and frankly in§cribed on its banner: 'Death to Communism.' On our lips we had
the time 'Long
Live Communism,' whereas by our deeds we were fighting socialism lictorious in the U.S.S.R. In words-'Long live the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union.' In deeds-preparation for the assassination of the members of the Political Bureau of the Central
Committee of. the Party, one of whom we did kill. In words.'.....:::
'Down with imperiallSm,' in deeds-banking on the defeat of the
U.S.S.R. in the struggle against international imperialism.''
Continuin.g, the accused Evdokimov says: "Trotsky -is not
with us here in the dock because he is abroad. He has two perspectives before him: either lo disappear immediately and without a
trace,
Azef did, not only from the political arena, but from the
arena of life in general and go into oblivion, hide behind some

all

as

166

false name as Azef did--or else, at some time, face a proletarian
<:ourt."
"I don't consider it possible to plead for clemency,'' says Evdokimov in co.nclusion. "Our crimes against the proletarian stale
and against ihe international revolutionary movement are too g1:eat
to make it possible for us to expect clemency."

*
"The political importance and the past of each of us," says
Dreitzer, "were not the same. But, having become assassins, we
have all become equals here. I, at any rate, am one of those who
have lm right to expect nor to ask for mercy."

*

.;.:

"Whatever our fate may he," says the accused Reingold in
his last plea, "we have been already shot politically. The representative of the State prosecution, speaking with! the· vo;ice of
li0,000,000 Soviet people, demanded that we be shot like mad
.dogs. I knew where I was going and what I was.going for. I and the
whole of the terrorist Trotskyite-Ziinovievite organization sitting
here have been exposed by this trial as the shock troop, as a
white-guard, fascist shock troop, of the international counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie.
"The circle has closed. It is over with the political masquerade,.
it is over with the shams of oppositions, discussions and platforms.
Opposition was superseded by conspiracy against the sta~e; disGUssions and platforms were superseded by bullets and bombs." In
<:oncl:usion Reingold says:
·
"Our trial, the trial of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist and
fascist organization, will bury the political corpses of Zinoviev,
Kamenev and Trotsky, and of his shadow, his loyal armour-bearer,
Sntlrnov, as. under a heavy tombstone.
"I !'.ully admitted my guilt. It is not for me to plead for mercy."

*

*

"I am guilty of the assassination of Kirov," declares Bakayev.
"I took a direct part in the preparation of other tt•rroristic acts
against the lcudt•rs of the Party and the govt•mnwn!. l nm pn·pared to bear full n•sponsibilily. \Ye Trotskyill's anti Zino\'it•vitcs
11\7

not only worked for the benefit of the international counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, we also worked hand in hand with the·
agents of the most bitter enemy of the working class, fascism.
"The facts which were revealed before this Court show to the
whole world that the organizer of this unprecedented Trotskyite- ·
Zinovievite counter-revolutionary terrorist bloc, its moving spirit,:
is Trotsky. I have wagered my head over and over in the interests
of Zinoviev and Kamenev. I am heavily oppres!;ed by the thought
that I became an obedient tool in the hands of Zinoviev and Kamenev, became an agent of the counter-re,·olution, that I raised my
hand against Stalin."
.
Bakayev turns 1o Zinoviev and accuses him of not being frank·
even at this trial.
Bakayev concludes by stating that he realizes the gravity· or
his crime and awail'I the deserved and just verdict of the prole-·
tarian court.

*

*

*

The accused Pickel makes a detailed review of the history i>C
the development of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite opposition which
became a gang of counter-revolutionary terrorists. He says that
from 1925 onwards, the struggle this opposition waged against the
Party and its Central Committee contained all the elements of
political banditry. The struggle started with filthy insinuations
agairist the Party leadership and ended with terroristic acts.
"Only one conclusion can be drawn,'' says Pickel. "We repre-·
sent a most brutal gang of criminals who are nothing more nor'
less than a detachment of international fascism. Trotsky, ZinovieV'
and Kamenev were our banner. To this banner were drawn ·not
only we, the dregs of the land of Sowels, but also spies, and agent$
of foreign states and those sent here for diversive activities.
"The last eight years of my life have been years of baseness,
years or' terrible, nightmarish deeds. I must bear my deseivecl
punish.ment."

*

*

With this tile evening se~sion closes.

168

*

AUGUST 23 (MORNING SESSION)
During the morning session of August 23 the last pleas or
the accust'<l arc continued.
··1, together with Zinoviev and Trotsky," declares Kamenev,.
.. was the organizer and leader of a terrorist plot which planned
and prepared a number of terroristic attempts on the lives of the
i<'aders of the goH!rnmcnt and the Party of our country, and which
carri<'d out the assassination of Kirov.
"For ten years, if not more," continue~ Kamenev, "I waged a
struggle against the Party, against the government of the land of
Soviets, and against Stalin personally. In this struggle, it seems to,
me, I utilized every weapon in the political arsenal known .to me.
-open political discussion, attempts to penetrate into factories and
works, illegal leaflets, secret printing presse_s, deception of the
Party, the organization of street demonstrations, conspiracy and.,.
finally, terrorism.
"I once st~died the history of th~ political movements and I
cannot remember any form of political struggle thaf we did not
use during the past ten years. The proletarian revolution allowed,
us a period of time for our political struggle which no other revolution gave its enemies. The bourgeois revolution of the 18th century gave its enemies weeks and days, and then destroyed them.
The proletarian revolution gave us ten years in which to reform·
and to real~ze that we were in error. But we did not do that. Three
times -was I reinstated in the Party. I was recalled from ex.ile
merely on the strength of my personal statement. After all the
mistakes I had committed I was entrusted with responsible missions and posts. This is the third time I am facing a proletarian>
court on the charge of terroristic intentions, designs and actions.
"Twice my life was spared. But there is a limit to everything,.
there is a limit to the magnanimity of the proletariat, and tha~
169

limit we have reached. I ask myself," says Kamenev further, "is it
an accident that alongside of myself, Zinoviev, Evdokimov, Ba·
kayev and Mrachkovsky are sitting emissaries of foreign secret·
police departments, people with false passports, with dubious bio-,
graphies and undoubted connections with the Gestapo. No! It is
not an accident. We ~re sitting here side by side with the agents
-0f foreign secrel·police departments because our weapons were
the same, because our arms became intertwined before our fate
became intertwined here in this dock.
"Thus," says Kamenev in conclusion, "we served fascism, thus
we organized counter-revolution against socialism, prepared,
paved the way for the interventionists. Such was the path we took,
and such was the pit of contemptible treachery and all that is
loathsome into which we have fallen.

*

*

*

"I want to say once again," says the accused Zinoviev at the
-Outset of his last plea, "that I admit that I am fully and completely guilty. I am guilty of havmg been an organizer of the
'l'rotskyite-Zinovievite bloc second only to Trotsky, the bloc which
set itself the aim of assassinating Stalin, Voroshilov and a number
<1f other leaders of the Party and the government. I plead guilty
to having been the principal organizer of Uie assassination of Kirov.
"The Party," C()(ll.tinues Zinoviiev, "saw where we were going
.and warned us. In one of his speeches Stalin pointed out that
tendencies inay arise among the opposition to impose its will
upon the Party by violence. At one of the conferences held
before the XIV Congress of the Party, Dzerzhinski called us
Kronstadtists. Stalin, Voroshilov, Orjonikidze, Dzerzhinski and
Mikoyan did all they could to persuade us, to save us. Scores of
times they said to us: you may do enormous harm to the Party
and the Soviet government, and you yourselves will perish in
doing so. But we did not heed these warnings. We entered into
an alliance wiih Trotsky. We filled the pla:ce of the Menshcviks,
Socialist-Revolutionaries and whiteguards who could not come
out openly in our country. We took the place of the terrorism of
the Socialist·Revolutionaries. Not the pre-revolutionary terrorism
which was directed against the autocracy, but the Right Socialist
170

Revolutionaries' terrorism of the period of the Civil \Var, when the
S-R's shot at Lenin.
"!\[y defecth·c Bolshevism became transformed into anti-Bolshe\·ism. and through Trotskyism I arrived at fascism. Trotskyism
is a ,·aricty of fo5cism, and Zinovievism is a variety oi Trotskyism.
"Belie\·e me, citizens judges, if I say that I· suffered the gi"eatest punishment, greater than anything that awaits me, when I
heard the testimony of Nathan Lurye and the testimony of Olberg.
I felt and understood that my name will be associated with the
names of those who stood beside me. On my right hand Olberg,
on my left-Nathan Lurye. . . ."

*

*

*

In his last plea Smirnov deals in detail with the history
of his struggle against the Party leadership after he was forgiven
by the Party and reinstated into its ranks in 1929.
"I returned to the Party," says Smirnov, "in 1929-30, and the
Pa:rty did all it could to help me get on the right track. But I
was unable to justify its confidence."
Continuing, Smirnov says that in 1931 he resumed the fight
against the Party leadership.
"This was the mistake I made, which later grew into a crime.
It induced me to resume contact with Trotsky, it induced me to
seek connections with the Zinovievite group, it brought me into a
bloc with the group of Zinovievites, into receiving instructions on
terrorism from Trotsky through Gaven in November 1932, it
brought me to terrorism. I communicated Trotsky's instructions
on terrorism to the bloc to which I belonged as a member of the
centre. The bloc accepted these instructions and began to a!!t.'.
Then Smirnov continues, just as during the preliminary
_ investigation and the trial, to deny responsibility for the crimes
- committed by the Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist centre after his
arrest.
Further, Sniirnov appeals to all his adherents resolutely to
nreak with the pa-st, to fight against Trotskyism and Trotsky. He
fdeclares: "There is no other path for our country but the one
it is now treading, and there is not, nor can there be, any other
leadership than that which history ,Ims given us. Trotsky, who
sends directions and instructions on terrorism. and regards our
171

state as a fascist stale. is an enemy; he is on tht> other side of the
barri\!ade; he must be fought."

•

•

*

"~ly entire political outlook,'" says Olbcrg, "took shape under

the influence of Trotsky and Trotskyism. Following Trotsky, I
shrank neither from terrorism nor from agreements with the fas·
cists. The aims of the Trotskyile counter-re\·olutionary organization and the hopelessness of these aims became particularly clear
to me at this trial during which I saw, quite distinctly, how piti·
ful were the leaders of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite counter-revolution who led us, the young ones, along the path of terroristic
struggle, and how great was the power of the Soviet stale ... I ask
the Supreme Court lo give me the opportunity of trying at least
to some extent to atone for my monstrous crimes."'

*

•

*

"In my last plea,'' says Berman· Yurin, "I do not want
to defend myself by any arguments. There are no such arguments.
1 repented, but loo late. Yesterday, in his speech for the prosecution, the citizen State Prosecutor drew the complete picture of my
crimes. And the proletarian state will deal wilh me as I deserve.
It is too late for contrition."

*

"Here," says Holtzman, "in the dock beside me, is a gang of
murderers, not only murderers, but fascist murderers. I do not
n'lk for mercy."

*

...

*

*

...

*

*

*

*

"My crime is clear, it has been proved," says N. Lurye. "I d~
not know what I might still say in my defence. In my last plea
I can only express regret for wihat I have done . . . hut my regret
comes too late."
_In his last plea M. Lurye says:
"I did not conceal anything, I cannot be reproached for thaL
The State Prosecutor demanded that I be sternly punished. But
can my crime be compared with the crime of my chief?"
M. Lurye pleads mitigating circumstances.
With this the morning session closes.
172

AUGUST 23. (EVENING SESSION)
Du.iring ilie evening session of August 23, last pleas arc made by
'Ter-Vaganyan and Fritz Da'l<'id.

*

*

*

In h~s last plea; the accused Ter-Vaganyan fully admits his
guilt before the Soviet state and b.i.e Pa..oiy.
"! am crushed by the weight of all that was revealed here,"
says Ter-Vaganyan. "I am.crushed by the speech of the State Prosecutor."
"It is very hard to bear when, by the whole course of one's
'Crime, one finds oneself in the position of an enemy, of a fascist
being tried by a proletarian court. In such a moment it would of
<:ourse be hypocrisy if I did not say one thing: I would like to
·have the opportunity of exerting every effort to fill the abyss, the
chasm, which separates me from my former comrades.
"I bow my head in guilt before the Court and say: whatever
your decision may be, however stern your verdict, I accept it as
deserved."
·*

*

*

"I want to assure the proletarian Court," says the ae«uscd
Fritz David, "that I curse Trotsky. I curse that man who ruined
.my life and pushed me into heinous crime."

*

*

At 7. p. m. the Court withdraws to the Council Cham,ber.

*

..

*

On August 24, at 2:30 p.m., the president, ComrS:~e ·VIricb~'.
reads the verdict.
. 173

TUE VERDICT

Jn the name of the l.'nion o/ Soviet Sociali.~i Republics
the Military Collegium of !he Supreme Court of tlie U.S.S.R., consisting of:
President: the President of the :'\Iilitary Colkgium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R., Army Military Jurist, Comrade l'. V.
Ulrich;
Members: the Vice-Presidents of the Military Collegimn of th•!
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R., Am1y Corps }iilitm:y Jurist, Comrade I. L. Matulevich, and Divisional Military .lt;risl, Comrade I. T.

Nikitclienka;
Secretary: Military Jurist of First Rank, C:omrnde Ko.~tyushko;
State Prosecution being represented by the State AUorney of
the U.S.S.R., Comrade A. Y. Vyshinsky,
in an open court session, in the city of Moscow, on August 19-24,
1936 heard the case against:
1. Zinouicv, Grigori Evseyevich, born 1883, employee, sentenced on January 16, 1935, in the Zinovievite ":!\Ioscow centre..
case to imprisonment for ten years in accordance with Articles 17
and 588 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.;
2. Kamcnev, Lev Borisovich, born 1883, employee, sentenced
on January 16, 1935 in the Zinovievite "Moscow centre'' case to
imprisonment for five yeal."S, in accordance with Articles 17 and 588
·of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R., and again sentenced on July
27, 1935, to imprisonment for ten years, in accordance with
Articles 17 and 586 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.;
3. Evdokimov, Grigori Eremeyevich, born 1884, employee,
sentenced on January 16, 1935, in the Zinovievite "Moscow centre"
case to imprisonment for eight years in accordance with Articles
17 and 588 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.;
4. Bakayev, Ivan Petrovich, born 1887, employee, sentenced on
January 16, 1935 in the Zinovievite "Moscow centre" case to imprisonment for eight years in accordance with Articles 17 and 588
of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.;
5. 1llrachkovsky, Sergei Vitalievich, born 1883, employee;
6. Ter-Vaganyan, Vagarshak Arutyunovich, :born 1893, employee;
·
7. Smirnov, Ivan Nikitich, born 1880, employee
174

all se\·en being charged with having committed crimes covered
by Articles 58' and 58" of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
8. Dreitzer, Ephim Alexandrovich, born 1894, employee;
9. Reingold, Isak Isayevich, born 1897, employee;
10. Pickel, Richard Vitoldovich, born 1896; employee;
11. Holt:man, Edouard Solomonovich, born 1882, employee;
12. Fritz David, alias Kruglyansky, llya-David Israilevich, born.
1897, employee;
13. Olberg, Valentine Pavlovich, born 1907, employee;
U. Berm<m-Yurin, Konon Borisovich, alias Alexander Fomich,
born 1901, employee;
15. Lurye, :\loissei Ilyich, alias Emel, Alexander, born 1897, employee;
16. Lurye, Nathan Lazarevich, born 1901, employee
all being charged with having committed crimes covered by Articles 19 and 588 , 5811 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
The preliminary and court investigations have established that;
In the autumn of 1932, on the instructions'of L. Trotsky received by I. N. Smimov, leader of the Trotskyite underground organization in the U.S.S.R., a union took place between the Trotskyite and Zi.novievite underground cormter-revolutionary groups.
which formed a "united centre" consisting of Zinoviev, Kamenev,
Evdokimov and Bakayev (representing the Zinovievites), and of
Smirnov, Ter-Vaganyan and Mrachkovsky (representing the Trotskyites).
The union of these counter-revolutionary groups 'vas achieved
on the basis of the use of individual terror against the leaders of
tlie C.P.S.U. and the Soviet Government.
The Trotskyites and Zinovievites, on the direct instructions of
Trotsky, received by the "united centre" through the accused Smirnov, Holtzman and Dreitzer, in this period (1932-36) concentrated.
all their hostile· activities against the Soviet Government and tile
C.P.S.U. ~n the organization of terror against their leaders.
f The Court has established that the "united centre," on the direct
instructions of L. Trotsky and zinoviev, organized and carried out
on December 1, 1934, through the medium of the underground terrorist Leningrad Zinovie,ite group of Nikolayev-Kotolynov, thefoul murder of the memher of the Presidium of the Central Execu175

tive Committee of the U.S.S.R. and member ·of . the Central
Committee of the C.P.S.U., Comrade Sergei Mironovich Kirov.
Not confining themselves the assassination of Comrade Kirov,
the Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre prepared a number of terroristic
acts against Comrades Stalin, Voroshilov, Zhdanov, L. M. Kaganovich, Orjonikidze, Kossior and Postyshev.
·
The materials of the court investigation and the confessions
<>f the accused Zinoviev, Kame~v. Evdokimov, Bakayev, Mrachkovsky and Dreit1:er have established that L. Trotsky, from ahroad,
and Zinoviev within the country, expedited by every means the
preparations for the murder of Comrade S. M. Kirov. For the purpose of expediting the murder of Comrade S. M. Kirov, Kamenev,
in June 1934, on the instructions of U1e united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre went to Leningrad where he conducted negotiations with
the leader of one of the Leningrad terrorist groups, Yakov!ev,
whose case has been set :iside for a separate trial, about the organization of this terroristic act against Comrade Kirov.
The Court has also established that on the instructions of the
~'united centre" the accused Bakayev, in November 1934, also made
a special journey to Leningrad to check up on the preparedness
of the Leningrad terrorist group of Nikolaye\•-Kotolynov for the
~rrying out of the assassination of Comrade Kirov. At a secret
meeting of the members of this Leningrad terrorist group, Bakayev
heard the report of Leonid Nikolayev, the murderer of Comrade
Kirov., and, in U1c n:ime of the united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre,
gave him and his accomplices a number of practical instructions
concerning the organization of the assassination of Comrade S. M
·Kirov. It was in conformity with these instructions that L. Nikolayev ·and bis accomplices committed the foul murder of Comrade
-S. M. Kir:ov on December 1, 1934.
The Court has also established that in 1934, the accused Bakayev, Reingold and Dreitzer, in accordance with the decisions of
the "united centre," twice tried to make an 3ltempt on the lifo of
·Comrade Stalin.
· In order the more successfully to commit the terroristic acts
•planned by the "united centre" it organiled in 1933 in the cit): of
Moscow, the so·called "MoscQw terrorist centre,"· consisting of th.e

to

r76

accused Reingold, Pickel and Dreitzer, under the direct gui~
of the accused Bakayev, a member of the "united centre."
The "united centre;, instructed the a~cused Bakayev to make
practical prepantions for the assassination of Comrades Stali'll and
Kirov, and it instructed Dreitzer, a member of the ''Moscow terrorist centre" to organize a terroristic act against Comrade Voroshilov.
Not confining himself to the organization of a number of terroristic acts against. the· leaders of the Soviet Government _and the
C.P.S.U. under the.immediate direction of the "united centre,'"L.
Trotsky, in the period of 1932-36, was systematieally s~ding
number of terrorists into the U.S.S.R. fr0m abroad for the same
purpose.
In November. 1932, L. Trotsky sent ·to the U.S.S.R. BermanYurin and Frfu David; and before leaving, the iaflter ~ivM
from L. Trmsky personal instruction5 with regard to the·org!lnization or the ·assassination
comrade Stalin.
In. the same year, 1932, L. Trotsky sent to. Mosoow ·f~m Beriin
the terroi:isl Nathan Lurye. In conjllnction ·with Franz.:Weitz,
agent of the Gestapo and a person trusted by Himmler,Jl.Ow.cliief
of :the Gestapo {Franz Weitz wai.s then liying in Moscow under
the ~ise of a foreign specialist), Nathan Lurye made preparatiOns
for attempts on the lives of Comil'ades Stllilin, Voroshilov, Kaganovich and Orjonikidze.
In the winter.of 1932-33, after the departure of Franz Weit7.
from Moscow, Nathan Lurye and his terrorist group conti!iued
the preparation of these terroristic 'acts jointly with the accused
Mois.sei Lurye who arrived in Moscow from Berlin fo ·1933, Mid
who had also received from Trotsky instructions to. expedite terroristic acts against the leaders of the Soviet Government and the
C.P.S.U..
In 1934, \vhile at Chelyabstroi, Nathan Lurye tried to make an
attempt o.n
lives of Comrades Kaganovich and Orjonikidze.
Fin~lly, the said Nathan Lurye, on May 1, 1936, on the instruction
of~ and by previous agreement with, Moissei Lurye, tried to make.
an attempt cm the life of Comrade Zhdanov during the First of Ma~
demonstro.tion iR Leningrad.
.
.·
In the summer of 1935, L. Trotsky, thtough his son L •. Sedov,

a

of

the

177

sent to the u.s.s.R: rrom Berlin the terror~t v. olbers. who med.
~ fal,."t: passport issued in the name or a subject of the Republic of
Honduras. V. O~berg obtained !his passport with the aid of the
German secret police, ·the Gestapo, having first received the oons~nt of i.. Trotsky, tbrough the latter·s son, Scdov•. t~ utilize the
assistance of the German secret police in tllis matter.
On arriving in the U.S.S.R., V. Olberg established eontac! with
(he counter-revolutionary Trotskyite terrorist group· in the ci1.y
{'.f Gorki, and trained a number of terrorist:; who were to commit
:t terroristic act agamst rt.he leaders of the Soviet Government and
!he C.P.S.U'. in the Red Square in Moscow on May 1, 1936.
The oourt investigation has also established that simultaneously
willi the preparation of terroristic acts against Comrades Stalin,
Y.oroshilov, Zhdanov, Kaganovieh and Orjonikidzc, the Trolskyite·
Zioovievite terrorist centre made preparations for terroristic acts
against Comrades KossiOF and .Postyshev through the medium o~
tpe .Ukraill!.ian terrorfo .group Ope!'Rting under the direction of
t(1e Trotsli.yite Muk.hin, whose case has been set aside for ~parat!

ii;ial.
·

Thqs it is. established Uiat

!} G. E. Zinoviev;
2} L. 8. Kamen~;
3) G. E. Evdokimov;
4) !. P. Bakageo;
5) $. V. MraelJkovsky;
6} V. ·LTer.-Vauanyan and
7) 1. N. Smirnov
m-e guilty of:
a) H;ving &rgllnized· the united Trotslty.ife:ifnotie'vite .ten-or,
ist cep.tre for tbe, purpo51'._ C>,f ~assinating the leaders of. the Sovie!

Government and of the C.P.S. u.,

h} Uavin~PreP~ed, ~on De~i 1~34 •.~ the

foul mur<le~ of ~wade S: M. Kirov ibrOuih .the niedium o-f fue
Leningrad un.dergrotllid Jerrorist group of Nikohiyev-Kotolynov

Mmtary

and others sentenCed on.December 29,. 1934, by the
Collegium.or the Sui:,>reD:if f.?urt of the u:s.s:R., ·
·
. c) ·'lia~-i?)g organiz~ a nu~.":" of ter~orist groups who mad·e
178

preparations lo.assassinate Comrades Stalin, Voroshil9y, Zhd~v,
Kaganov1ch, Orjonikidze, Kossior and Postyshev_:__i.e., cfBneS
covered by Articles 588 and 58 11 of the Criminal· Code of ~e
R.S.F.S.R .
.8) E. A. Dreitzer;
9) I. I. Reingold;
10) R. V. Pickel;
11) E. S. llolt:mw1;
12) Fritz David (Kruglyansky, llya-David Israilevich).;
13) V. P. Olberg;
14) K. B. Berman-}'urin; .
15} M. I. Lur11e (Emel, Alexander) and
l6) N. L. Lurye
are guilty or having been, while members of the underground
counter-revolutionary terrorist Trotskyite-Zinovievite .organization, active participants in the preparations for ·lh.e assassination
of the leaders or the Party and the Government, Comrades Stalin,
Voroshilov, Zhdanov, Kaganovich, Orjonik.idzc, Kossior and Poslyshev,
.
i.e,, crimes covered by Articles 19 and 583 , 58." of the Criminal
Code of the R.S.F.S.R. '
On the basis of the above, and guided by Articles 319 and 320
of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the R.S.F.S.R., the Military
Collegium of the_ Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
Sentences:
1) Zinoviev, Grigori Evseyevioh
2) Kamenev, Lev Borisovich
3) Evdokimov, Grigori Eremeyevich
4) Bakayev, Ivan Petrovich
5) Mrachkovsky, Sergei Vitalevich
6) Ter-Vaganyan, Vagarshak Arutyunovich
7) Smirnov, Ivan Nikitich
8) Dreitzer, Ephim Alexandrovich
9) Heingold, Isak Isayevich
10) Pickel, Richard Viloldovich
11) Holtzman, Edouard Solomonovich
12) Fritz David (Kruglyansky, Ilya-David Israilevich)
13) Olberg, Valentine Pavlo'1c~
179

14}. Berman-.Yurin, Konon Borisovich.
11;) Lurye, MQissei Ilyich (Em~, Alexan~er) and
.'16) L~rye, .Nathan Lazareviclt . _ ~
'all to the supreme penalty-to . be shot,' a.nd all properly personally belonging to them lo be confiscated.
Lev I>;vidovieh .Trotsky, and his son, Lev· Lvovich Se®v, now
abroad, convicted by the evidence of the accused I. N. SmimO\',
E. S. Holtzman, Dreitzer, V. Olberg, Fritz David (I. I.Kruglyansky)
and Berman:Yurin, and also by the materials in the present' case
as having directly prepared and person®!1ly directed the organiZation in the U.S.S.R. of terroristic acts against the leaders of 'the
C.P.S.U. and the Soviet State, ai:e subject, in the event of their being discovered on the territory of the u:s.s.R., to immediate ~rresl
and trial by the Military Collegium of i!he Supreme ·court of the

u.s.s.R: ·

·

Pr~siding:
[Signed]

V. V; ULRICH
President of the Military Collegi~m of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
Army Military J uriat

Members of the Court:
I. MATULEVICH
·.:rsignedJ
ViCe-President of the Military Collegium
of the Supreme Cou!'t of the U.S.S.R.
Aimy Cor.ps M,iilitary Jurist

I. NIKITCHENKO
Vice-President·of the Milita;g Collegium
of the Supreme Court of the ·U.S.S.R.
Divisional Military. j urisl ·

100

