PEOPLE'S COMMISSARIAT OF JUSTICE OF THE U.S.S.R.

REPORT OF COURT PROCEEDINGS
IN THE CASE OF THE

ANTI-SOVIET
TROTSKYITE CENTRE
Heard Before The

MILITARY COLLEGIUM OF THE

SUPREME COURT OF THE U.S.S.R.
Moscow, January 23-30, 1937
IN RE:

Y. L. Pyatakov,K. B.Radek,G. Y.Sokolnikov, L. P.Serebryakov,
N. I. Muralov, Y. A. Livshitz, Y. N. Drobnia, M. S. Bogualavaky,
I. A. Knyazev, S. A. Rataichak, B. 0. Norkin, A. A. Shestov, M. S.
Stroilov, Y. D. Turok, I. Y. Hrasche, G. E. Pushin, V. V. Arnold
Accused of trnson against the country, espionage, act;
of diversion, wrecking activities and the preparation of
terrorist act•, i.e., of crimes covered by Articles 58 I a,
588, 589an<l 5811 of thP Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.

VERBA TIM REPORT

•

Published by the

PEOPLE'S COMMISSARIAT OF JUSTICE OF THE u.s.S.R.
MOSCOW 1937

This is a translation of the verbatim report of the proceedings of the ~Iilitary Collegium of the Supreme Court of the
U.S.S.R., January 23 to January 30, 1937, in the case of the
anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre.
Re the session of the Military Collegium of the Supreme
Court of the U.S.S.R. held in camera on January 27, 1937, this
volume contains a communication for the press approved
by the President of the Military Collegium of the Supreme
Court of the U.S.S.R.

CONTENTS

Page

MORNING SESSION, JANUARY 23
Opening of the Trial
-·
Indictment
Examination of the Accused Pyatakov
EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 23
Examination of the Accused Pyatakov (Resumed)
Examination of the Witness Bukhartsev
MORNI~G

1
4

21
.

SESSION, JANUARY 24
Examination of the Accused Radek

EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 24
Examination of the Witness Romm
Examination of the Accused Radek (Resumed)
Examination of the Accused Sokolnikoo
Examination of the Accused Serebryakou
'MORNIKG SESSION, JANUARY 25
Examination of the Witness Loginov
Examination of the Accused Boguslavskg
Examination of the Accused Drobnis

46
77

82
\

136
146
146
168

176
192
205

EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 25
Examination of the Accused Muralov
Examination of the Accused Shestov

216

MORNING SESSION, JANUARY 26
Examination of the Accused Shestov (Resumed)
Examination of the. Accused Stroilov
Examination of the Accused Norkin
Examination of the Witness Stein

26'1

292

EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 26
Questions submitted to the Expert Witnesses
Examination of the Accused Arnold
•.
Examination of the Accused Livshitz

300·
302
333

233

261
27~

MORl'\ING SESSION, JANUARY 27
Examination of the Accused Kgnazev
Examination of the Accused Turok .
Examination of the Accused Rataichak

358
392
398

-EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 27
Examination of the Accused Rataichak (Resumed)
Examination of the Accused Hrasche
Examination of the Accused Pushin ·
·.
Examination of the Witness Tamm
Additional Questions addressf!d to Pyatakov and f?/idek
Replies from Expert Witnesses

421
434
439
442
446

Session in Camera

416

461

EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 28
Speech for the Prosecution by A. Y. Vyshinsky, Procurator of the U.S.S.R.
Speech for the Defence by l. D. Braude
Speech for the Defence by S. K. Kaznachegev

462
516
522

MORNING SESSION, JANUARY 29

Speech for the Defence by N. V. Kommodov
Last Plea of the Accused Pyatakov
Last. Plea of the Accused Radek
Last Plea of the Accused Sokolnikov
Last Plea of· the Accused Serebryakov
"'""
Last Plea of the Accused Boguslavsky
Last Plea of the Accused Drobnis
Last Plea of the Accused Muralov
Last Plea of the Accused Norkin
Last Plea· of the Accused Shestov
Last Plea of the Accused Stroilov

5~0

539
540
551

556
~.::--

._557
559

560
561

,62
563

_EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 29 (CONTINUED UNTIL THE MORNING OF JANUARY 30)
Last Plea of the Accused Arnold .
566
'566
Last Plea of the Accused Livshitz
:·· - .-· . ~ ·-567
Lasi Plea of the Accused Knyazev
569
Last Plea of the Accused Turok
Last Plea of the Accused Rataichak
570
572
Last Plea of the Accused Hrasche
573
Last
Plea
of
the
Accused
Pushin
I,

The Verdict

574

REPORT ·oF COURT PROCEEDINGS

COMPOSITION OF THE COURT
PRESIDENT:

Army Military Jurist

V. V. ULRICH
President of the Military Collegium of the
· Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
MEMBERS OF THE COURT:

Army Corps Military Jurist

I. 0. MATULEVICH
Vice-President of the Military Collegium of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
Divisional Military Jurist

N.M.RYCHKOV
Member of the Military Collegium of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

Military Jurist of First Rank

A. F. KOSTYUSHKO
STATE PROSECUTOR:

A. Y. VYSHINSKY
THE DEFENCE:

I. D. BRAUDE

N. V. KOMMODOV

S. R. KAZN.~CHEYEV
Members of the
Moscow Collegium of Defence

~--

..

MORNING SBSSION, JANUARY 23, 1937, 12.05 P. M.

Commandant of· the Court: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: I hereby open the Court sessiO!Il of the Military:
Coll~ium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
The trial is of Pyatakov, Radek, Sokolnikov, Serebryakov,
Llvshitz, Muralov, Drobnis, Boguslavsky, Knyazev, Rataichak,
Norkin, Shestov, Stroilov, Turoik, Hrasche, Pushin and Arnold on
charges of ,treason against the country, espionage, committing acts
-0f diversion, and the preparation of terrorist acts, i.e., of crimes·
covered by Articles 581a., 588, 589 and 58 11 of the Criminal Code
-0f the R.S.F.S.R.
.
[At the request of the President, the Secretary reports that all
the accus~ in the trial are present in the dJOck, that the witnesses
-summoned-D. P. Bukhartsev, V. G. Romm, F. F.- Loginov, L. E.
Tamm and A. M. Stein-are in the wjtnesses' room and that engineers P. A. Lekus, B. N. POlkrovsky and Y. M. Monosovich, who
have been summoned as expert witnesses, are present in Court.1
The President: Accused Pyatakov, Yuri (Georgi) Leonidovich,
horn 1890, have you received a oopy of the indictment?
Pyatakov: Yes, I have.
·
·
The President: Accused Sokolnikov, Grigori Yakovlevich, born
. 1888, have you .received a copy of the indictment?
· . Sokolnikov: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Radek, Karl Berngardovich, born 1885,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
· Radek: Yes, I have. ·
The President: Accused Serehry.a-kov, Leonid Petrovich, born
1888, have you received a copy of the indictment?
Serebryakov: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused .Livsihitz, Yakov Ahramovkh, born
1896, have you received a copy oif the indictment?
Livshitz: Yes, I have.
The President: Accu.Sed Murafov, Nikolai Ivanovich,- born 18_77.
bave you received a copy of the indictment?
M uralov: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Drabnis, Yakov ~aumovich, born 1891,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
1

Drobnis: Yes, I have.
Thi: President: Accused Boguslavsky, !'lfikhail Solomonovich,
born 1886, have you received a copy of the indictment?
Boguslavsky: Yes, I have.
- The Pnsident: Accused Knyazev, Ivan Alexandrovich, born
1893, have you received a copy of the indictment?
Knyazev: Yes, I have.
The President: ·Accused Rataichak, Stanislav Antonovioh, born
1894, have you received a copy of the indictment?
Rataichak: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Norkin, Boris Osipovich, born 1895,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
Norkin: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Shestov, Alexei Alexandrovkh, bora
1896, have you received a copy of the indictment?
Shestov: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Stroilov, Mikhail Stepanovich, born
1899, have you receivedi a copy of the indictment?
Stroilov: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Turok, Yosif Dmitrievich, born 1900~
have you received a copy of the indiictment?
Turok: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Hrasche, Ivan Yosifovich, born 1886~
have you received a copy of the indiictment?
Hrasche: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Pushin, Gavriil Yefremovt-ch, born
1896, have you received a copy of the indictment?
· ---- .
Pushin: Yes, I have.
The President: Accused Arnold, Valentin Volfridovich, alias
Va.silyev, Valentin Vasilyevich, is your real name Vasilyev or
Arnold?
Arnold: Vasilyev.
The President: Name and patronymic?
Arnold: Valentin Vasilyevich.
The Pr_fsident: Born 1S94?
Arnold: Yes.
The President: Have you received a copy of the indictment?
Arnold: I have.
--- - -- - - --The President: I announce the composition of the Court: Pre.si.-dent-Army Military Jurist, President of the Military Collegium,
-v. V. Ulrich, Members of the Court-Army Corps Military Jurist
.I. 0. Matulevich and Divisional Military Jurist N. M. Rychkov.
-Are there any objections to the composition of the Court? [The
accused reply in the negative.]
2

The prosecution is conducted by the Procurator of the U.S.S.R.,
Comrade A. Y. Vyshinsky.
The accused Knyazev is defended by Counsel Braude, Member
_of the Collegium of Defence; the accused Pushin is defended by
Counsel Kommodov, Member of the Collegium of Defence; the accused Arnold is defended by Counsel Kaznacheyev, Member of the
Collegium of Defence.
Upon receiving the indictment, the accused Pyatakov, Radek,
Sokolnikov, Serebryakov, Livshitz, Muralov, Drobnis, Boguslavsky, Rataichak, Norkin, Shestov, Stroilov, Turok and Hrasehe declined the services of counsel for defence and declared that they
would conduct their own defence. I consider it necessary once more
to ask the accused I have named, who prevfously declined the services of counsel for defence, whether they desire· to be represented
by counsel. (Turning to the accused.) Perhaps any of ·you has
changed his mind and desires counsel for defence?
Vgshinsky: I request that you ask each one separately.
The President: Accused Pyatakov, do you desire counsel for
defence?
Pyatakov: No.
The President: Accused Sokolnikov, do you desire counsel for
defence?
Sokolnikov: No.
The President: Accused Radek, do you desire c0UI1Jsel for
defence?
Radek: No.
The President: Accused Serebryakov, do you desire oounsel for
defence?
·
. ·
·
Serebrgah>V: No.
The President: Aocused Livshitz, do you desire counsel for
defence?· ·
Livshitz: No.
The President: Accused Muralov, do you desire counsel for
defence?
Muralov: No.
The President: Accused Drobnis, do you Elesire counsel for
defence?
Drobnis: No~
_
.
The President: Accwsed BoguslaV'sky, do you desire counsel for
defence?
Boguslavsky·: No.
.
.
The President: Accused Rataichak, do you deSire· oounsel for
defence?
·
Ratai.chak: Ne.
3

The President: Accused Norkin, do you desire counsel for
defence?
Norkin: No.
The President: Accused Shestov, do you desire counsel for
:defence?
Shestov: No.
The President: Aocused Stroilov, do you desire counsel for
defence?
. Stroilov: No.
The President: Accused Turok, do you desire colU1.Sel for
defence?
Turok: No.
The President: Accused Hra.sclle, do you desire counsel for
defence?
Hrasche: No.
The President: I must ex:p1ain to t!he accused who:havie d~lined
couooel for defence that in addition to the other rights of the ac-.
cused which I will presently explain, they are entitled to speak
in their defence after the speech for the prosecution.
I must explain to all the accused that they have the right to put
questions to the witnesses, experts, and to the other accused, and
also to submit explanations on any question that may form the
subject of investigation by the Court.
Has the State Prosecutor any request to make?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: Have the Counsel for Defence?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
"'":':
The President: Have the accused any requests to ma:Ire re~::-.
ing the summoning of witnesses or the inclusion of any documents
in the materialc; of the trial?
The Accused: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: Comrade Secretary, read the indictment, pleas~.,,
[The Secretary of the Court, A. F. Ko.styus!hko, reads the indictment.]
INDICTMENT
in the case of Y. L. Pyatakov, K. B. Radek, G. Y. Sokolnikov,
L. P. Serebryakov, N. I. Muralov, Y. A. Livshitz, -Y. N~ Dr..ol>JJ(s, __
M. S. Boguslavsky, I. A. Knyazev, S. A. Rataichak, B. 0. Norkin,
A. A. Shestov, M. S. Stroilov, Y. D. Turok, I. Y. Hrasche, G. E. Pus.bin and V. V. Arnold, aecused of treason against the eountry,
espionage, committing acts of diversion, wrecking activities and
fhe preparation of terrorist acts, i.e., of crimes covered by Articles
.:5s1a, 58'5, 589 and 58 11 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
4

The investigation of the case of the united Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist centre, members of which were convicted by the
Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. on August
24, 1936, established that in addition to the above-mentioned
centre, there existed a so-called reserve centre, formed on the
direct instructions of L. D. Trotsky, for the eventuality of the criminal activities of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bl"oc being exposed
by Ute orgians of the SoYiet government. The convicted members
of the united 'Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre, Zinoviev, Kamenev
and others, testified that the reserve centre consisted of Y. L. Pyatakov, K. B. Radek, G. Y. Sokolnikov and L. P. Serebryakov, all
known for their past T:rotskyite activities.
The preliminary investigation of the present case established
fuat fue so-called reserve centre was actually a parallel Trotskyite
<'entre, organized and operating under fue direct instructions of
L. D. Trotsky, now in emigration.
The Trot&kyite parallel centre developed its criminal activities
most energetically after the dastardly murder· of Sergei Mironovich
Kirov, and the subsequent break-up of the united Trots.kyite-Zin~
ovievite centre.
The main task which the parallel ·centre set itself was L1le
forcible overthrow of the Soviet government with the object
of ch_anging the social and state system existing in the U.S.S.R.
L. D. Trotsky, and on his instructions the parallel Trotskyite centre,
aimed at sei:ling power with the aid of foreign states with the ob"
ject of restoring capitalist social relations in the U.S.S.R.
These treasonable designs against the Soviet Union were ex~
pounded by L. Trotsky in their most outspoken form in his-letter
of instructions to the parallel Trotskyite centre, received by the
acq1sed K. B. Radek in December 1935.
The accused Radek, during his examination on December 22,
1936, testified on this point as follows:
"It must be understood, Trotsky wrote, that without to a
certain extent bringing the social structure of the U.S.S.R. in
line with that of the capitalist states, the government of the
bloc will-not be able to maintain itself in power and, lo preserve peace....
"The admission of German and Japanese capital for the
exploitation of the U.SSR. will create important capitalist
interests on Soviet territory. Those strata in the villages which
have not outlived the capitalist psychology and are :dissatisfied with the collective farms will gravitate towards them.
TI1e Germans and Japanese wil~ ,demand that we relieve the
atmosphere in the rura:l districts; we shall therefore have to
5

make concessions and allow the dissolution of the collective
farms or withdrawal from the collective farms."
(Vol. V, pp. 142, 143.)
. And further:
"Pyatakou and I arrived at the conclusion that'this directive
sums up the work of the bloc, dots all the i's and1 crosses all
the t's by bringing out very sharply the fact that under all
circumstances the government of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
bloc could only be the government of the restoratio~ of
capitalism."
(Vol. V, p. 146.)
The accused Pyatakov, in his turn, relating his conversation
with L. Trotsky near Oslo in December 1935, testified that L. Trotsky, in demanding that the diversive, wrecking and terrorist activities of the Trotskyite organization in the U.S.S.R. be intensified,
emphasized that as a result of an agreement with capitalist states,
it was necessary, as he put it, to retreat to capitalism. According
to the testimony of the accused Pyatakou, L. Trotsky said:
"This means, it will be necessary to retreat. This must be
firmly understood. Retreat to capitalism. How far and to
what degree, it is difficult to say now-this can be made
concrete only after we come into power."
(Vol. I, p. 269.)
That the program of the parallel Trotskyite centre was a program of the restoration of capitalism in the U.S.S.R. was testified
to by the accused G. Y. Sokolnikou during examination pn November 30, 1936:
~--

-

"This program provided for the renunciation of the policy
of industrialization and collectivization, and, as a result of
this renunciation, the revival in the villages, on the basis of
small farming, of capitalism, which, combined with tlj-e
capitalist elements in industry, would develop into capitalist
restoration in the U.S.S.R.
" ... All the members of the centre were agreed in recognizing that in the existing .circumstances there could be no
otl1er program, and that it was necessary to carry out precisely this program of the bloc."
(Vol. Vll!:_p._2_2_5.} ·
Proceeding from this program, L. D. Trotsky and his accomplices in the parallel centre entered into negotiations with agents
of foreign states with the object of overthrowing the Soviet government with the aid of armed intervention.
As a basfs' for these treasonable negotiations, L. D. Trotsky
and the parallel centre put forward: the permission in the U.S.S.R.
6

of the development of private eapital, the dissolution of the collective farms, the liquidation of the state farms, the leasing of number of Soviet enterprises as concessions to foreign _capitalists, and
the granting to such foreign states of other economic and political
advantages including the surrender of a part of Soviet territory.
On this point, L. D. Trotsky, according to the statement of the
accused K. Radek, wrote in :his aforementioned letter to K. Radek:

a

"It w~mld be absurd to think that we can come to power
without securing the favourable attitude of the. most important. capitalist governments, particularly of the most aggressive ones, such as the present governments of Germany and
Japan. It is absolutely necessary to have contacts and an
derstanding with these governments right now ...."
(Vol. V, p. 140.}

un-

The investigation has established that L. D. Trotsky ent.ered
into negotiations with one of the leaders of the German NationalSocialist Party with a view to waging a joint struggle against the
Soviet Union.
As testified by the accused Pyatakov, L. Trotsky, in his conversation with the accused in December 1935, informed him th::it
as a result of these negotiations he had concluded an agreement
''ith-the said leader of the National-Socialist Party on the following terms:
"1) to guarantee a generally favourable attitude towards
the German government and the necessary collaboration
with it in the -most important questions of an international
character;
"2) to -agree to territorial concessions;
"3} to permit German industrialists, in the form of concessions (or some other forms), to exploit enterprises in the
U.S.S.R. which are essential as complements to German economy (iron ore, manganese, oil, gold, timber, etc., were meant}.;
"4) to create in the U.S.S.R. favourable conditions for
the activities of German private enterprises;
"5) in time of war to develop extensive diversive activities in enterprises ~f the war industry and at the fronl
These diversive activities -are to be carried on under Trotsky's
instructions, agreed upon wil!h the German General Staff.
"These principles of the agreement, as Trotsky related,
were finally elaborated and adopted during Trotsky's meetiµg with Hitler's deputy, Hess.
"Likewise, said Trotsky, he had wi;ll-established connections with the.-- government."
(Vol. I, pp. 267, 268.)
7

The nature of this agreement and the extent of the territorial
concessions proposed were communicated by L. Trotsky in his.
letter to the accused Radek in December 1935.
In that letter, as testified by the accused K. Radek, L. Trotskg
wrote the following:
" ... We shall inevitably have to make territorial concessions ... , We shall have to yield the Maritime Province and
Amur region· to Japan, and the Ukraine to Germany.
"Germany needs r.aw materials, foodstuffs and markets.
We shall have to permit her to take part in the exploitation of ore, manganese, :gold, oil, apatites, and to undertake t<>
·supply her for a <leflnite period with foodstuffs and fats at
Jess than world prices.
"We shall have to yield the oil of Sakhalin to Japan
and to guarantee to supply her with oil in case of war with
America. We shall also have to permit her to exploit goldfields. We shall have to agree to Germany's demand not t<>
oppose her seizure of the Danube countries and the Balkans,
and not to hinder Japan in her seizure of China...."
(Vol. V, pp. 142, 144.)
Not confining himself to his own negotiations with representatives o.f foreign states, L. Trotsky instructed the members of the
parallel centre to enter into communication with the representatives of these states in the U.S.S.R.
As testified by the accused Pyatakov, L. Trotsky in his letters
to the parallel centre
" ... demanded that Radek and Sokolnikov, who h'~d Qi~
appropriate opportunities, probe for the necessary contacts_
with the official representatives of the powers, and support
what he, Trotsky, was actually carrying out."
(Vol. I, p. 257.)
In a·ccordance with this directive of L. D. Trotsky, the accused
K. Radek and G. Sokolnikov entered into communication with the
representatives of the said states.
On this point the accused Radek, during examination on December 4, 1936, testified:

" ... Trotsky's assertion about his communicatioR with
the representatives of the - - gove:rnment was not idle talk.
I was ·able to convince myself of this from conversations I
had had at diplomatic receptions in 1934-35 with the military
attache Mr. - - and the press attache of the - - embassy,
Mr. - - , G very 'vell informed representative of Germany.
"Both of them, in a cautious way, gave me to understand
8

that the - - government was in communication with Trotsky."
A:nd further:
"I told Mr. K - - that .jt was absolutely useless expecting
any concessions from the present government, but that the
- - government could count upon receiving concessions from
the realist politicians in the U.S.S.R., i.e., from the bloc,
when th!f fatter came to power."
(Vol. V, pp. 119, 121.)
The accused Sokolnikov also admitted ·that, taking advantage
of his position as Assistant Poople's Commissar of Foreign Affairs,
he, on £ .. D. Trotsky's instructions, carried on secret negotiations
with representatives of a certain foreign state.
The accused Sokolnikov testified:
"At the conclusion of an official conversation held in my
office, when Mr.-·- :;md the secretary of tlie embassy were
about to leave, Mr. - - stopped awhile.
"At that time both interpreters had already left my office. Taking advantage of this opportunity, Mr.--, while I
escorted him to the door, exchangedi a few sentences with
me. Mr. - - asked me: 'Are you aware that Mr. Trotsky has
made certain proposals to my government?'
"I replied: 'Yes, I have been informed of this.'
"Mr. - - asked: 'How do you appraise these proposals?'
"I replied: 'I think the proposals are quite serious.'
"Then Mr. - - asked: 'Is this only your personal
opinion?'
"I replied: 'No, this is also the opinion of my friends.'"
(Vol. VIII, pp. 235, 236.)
L. D. Trotsky and his accomplices in the U.S.S.R. placed their
main hopes of. coming into po\ver on the defeat of the Soviet
l:nion in a forthcoming war with the imperialist states. Accordingly, in his negotiations with the agents of foreign states, L. D.
T[olsky personally, and the parallel centre through the accused
Radek and Sokolnikov, strove in every way to hasten an armed
attack by these states on the U.S.S.R.
This is confirmed by the testimonies of all the accused in the
present case ..
Thus, the accused Rade.k:;during examination on December 22,
1936, cited the following excerpt from a letter addre.ssed to him by
L. D. Trotsky.
"It must be admitted that the question of power will
become a pradkal issue for the bloc only as a result of the
defeat of the U.S.S.R. in war. For this the bloc mnst make
energetic preparations. . . . Since the principal condition for
9

the Trotsky1tes coming into power, if they fail to achieve
this by means of terrorism, would be the defeat of the
U.S.S.R., it is necessary, as much as possible, to hasten the
clash between the U.S.S.R. and Germany."
(Vol. V, pp. 143, 117.)
_ L. D. Trotsky and his accomplices in the U.S.S.R. considered
it necessary, during the forthcoming war, to adopt an active defeatist position and to do all they could to assist the foreign interventionists in their fight against the U.S.S.R.
For example, the accused Pyatakov, relating the conversation
he had with L. Trotsky in December 1935 near Oslo, testified:
"As regards the war, L. D. Trotsky spoke of this very
explicitly. From his point of view, war is inevitable in the
near future.
"He, Trotsky, considers it absolutely necessary to adopt
a distinctly defeatist attitude in this war. He considers ¢at
the bloc's coming into power can certainly be hastened by
the defeat of the U.S.S.R. in war."
· {Vol. I, p. 258.)
In accordance with this plan of preparing the defeat of the
U.S.S.R. with the object of seizing power, L. D. Trotsky, Y. Pyatakov, K. Radek, G. Sokolnikov, L. P. Serebryakov, Y. Livshitz, and
the other accused in the present case carried on wrecking, diversive, espionage and terrorist activities for the purpose of disrupting
the economic and military power of our country, thus committing
a number of the gravest crimes against the state.
The investigation has established that under direct ins_:tructions
from L. Trotsky, and under the immediate guidance of the pa!o".al~
lel Trotskyite centre, a number of the accused in the present case:
Turok, Knyazev, Rataichak, Shestov, Stroilov, Hrascbe, and Pushin
were directly connected \vith diversive agents of the German and
Japanese inte11igence services, systematically carried on espionage{
on behalf of Germany and Japan, and committed a number o
wrecking and diversive acts in socialist industrial enterprises and on
the r&ilways, particularly in enterprises of importance for the defence of the country.
These espionage, diversive and wrecking activities were carried
on by the aforementioned accused in accordance with agreements
which the Trotskyites had with agents of foreign inteUigence ·services.
·For example, the accused Radek, confirming Pyatakov's testimony, testified during examination on December 22, 1936, that
one of the points of the agreement reached between Trotsky and
the .represer]itative of the German National-Socialist Party was the
obligation
10

" ... durir.g Germany's war against the U.S.S.R. . . to
adopt a defeatist position, to intensify diversive activities,
particularly in enterprises of military importance . . . to act
on Trotsky's instructions agreed upon with the German
General $taff."
·
(Vol. V, p. 152.)
Carrying out the obligations undertaken towards the representatives of Genpany and Japan, the parallel Trotskyite centre organized in a number of industrial enterprises in the Soviet Union
and on the railways diversive and wrecking groups, which were
charged with the task of carrying out diversive and wrecking acts.
. The accused Pyatakov, during examination on January 4,
1937, testified:
·

"I advised my people (and did so myself) not to scatter
their wrecking activities, but to concentrate their attention
on the principal big industrial· enterprises of <l.efonce· and
national importance.
"On this point I acted on Trotsky's directives, namely:
'To strike palpable blows at the most sensitive places.' "
(Vol. I, p. 287.)
Following the line given by the accused Y. Pyatakov, the groups
organized by the parallel centre carried out a number of diversive
and \"\Tecking ":icts in ·industrial· enterprises and on the railways.
For example, as was established at the trial on November 19-22
1936, in the case of the Trotskyite diversive group at the Kemerovo mine, an explosion was organized on the instructions of the
accused Drobnis at the "Tsentralnaya" pit, as a result of which
ten workers were killed and fourteen suffered grave injuries.
(See materials and documents of the court investigation in the
Kemerovo case of November 19-22, 1936, submitted in the present
case.}
Three acts of <livers.ion were organized under the di<ection of
the accused Rataichak at the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works,
of which two were explosions entailing the loss of human life and
en,ormous material dama~e to the state.
.
Similar diversive acts were committed, on ·the instructions of
Rataichak, by members of the Trotskyite organization at other
chemical enterprises of the Soviet Union as well (the Voskressensk
Combined Chemical Works and the Nevsky Plant).
The diversive nature of these explosions has heen established
:by the findings of the special technical experts, and by the confes.sioos of the accused Rafo.ichak, ·Pushin and H/r'asche themselves.
.
(Vol. XL, pp. 30, 39, 50.)
11

(See the findings of the technical experts.)
The most energetic diversivc and wrecking adivities on the
railways were carried on by the accused in the present case:
Y. A. Livshitz, Y. D. Turok, I. A. Rnya:ev, and llf. S. Boguslavsky.
Thus, on direct instructions of the parallel Trotskyite centre,
the accused Knyazev organized and effected the wrecking of a
number of trains, mostly troop trains, which entailed great loss
of human life. Of these cases of train wrecking the most serious
are:
a) the wreck of a troop train at Shumikha Station on October
27, 1935, at which 29 Red Army men were .killed and 29 injured;
b) the train wreck on the Yakhino-Ust-Katav section in December 1935;
c) the train wreck on the Yedinover-Berdyaush section in February, 1936.
The accused Knyazev organized the wrecking of troop trains
not only on the instructions of the parallel centre and, in particular, of the accused Livshitz, the leader of the diversive and wrecking
activities on the railways, but also on direct instructions from
Mr. H. - - , an agent of the Japanese intelligence service.
In this connection, during examination on December 14, 1936,
the accused Knyazev testified:
"As regards espionage and striking at the Red Army by
organizing the wrecking of troop trains with consequent loss
of human life, I took up this work only after I_)iad ascertained the attitude of the Trotskyite organization t~'!ards
espionage and diversive activities against the Red Army ·on
behalf of the Japanese intelligence service.
"With regard to -developing diversive and wrecking actiYities on the railways and the organization of l'he wrecking
of trains I carried out instructions in full, since in this ma<'tter the instructions of the Japanese intelligence service "fully
coincided with the instructions I had received somewhat
earlier from the Trotskyite organization."
(Vol. XX.XII, pp. 61, 57.)
Collaboration with agents of the Japanese intelligence serv!ce
- - - · · -· (Vol. XXIII, ~- 106.)

was also testified to by .the accused Y.. D. Turok.

In committing diversive acts in collaboration -with agents of
foreign intelligence services, and organizing the wrecking of trains,
explosions and fires in mines and industrial enterprises, the ac'~lJSed in the present case did not scruple io resort to the vUest
12

methods of struggle and deliberately and wilfully perpetrated such.
monstrous crimes as poisoning and causing the death of workers
for. the purpose o{ provoking discontent among the workers
against the Soviet govermnent.
·
Thus, during examination on December 4, 1936, the accused
Pyatakov on this point testified:
"We realized that if it became necessary to resort to acts
of diversion for the purpose of carrying out our wrecki!lg
plans, the loss of human life would be inevitable. We took
this into account and accepted it as inevitable."
(Vol. I, pp. 196, 197.)
The. accused Drobnis was even more cynical in his testimony
on this point:
"It.wiH ibe even better if human life is lost in the mine,
for that will certainly rouse the anger of the workers, and
that is what we need."
{V.ol. XIII, p. 66.)
That these enemies of the people deliberailely resolved to cause
great loss of human life in organizing acts of diversion is also
proved by the following testimony of the accused l(.nyazev, given
on December 26, 1936:

"Livshitz gave s.pecial in.structions to prepare and carry
out a number of acts of diversion {explosions, wrecking of
trains or poisoning), which would cause great loss of human
life."
(Vol. XXXII, p. 92.)
Similar testimony was g.iven by the accused Y. D. Turok.
(Vol. XXIII. p. 73.)
The Trotskyite centre and the diversive groups operating
under its direction in industrial enterprises and ort the railways
were to develop particularly active destructive work in industrial
plants and on the railways by means of explosions, fires, train
wrecking, etc., in time of war, when these monstrous acts of treason woald strike a particularly palpable blow at the defence capacity of the Soviet Union.
Thus, the accused Pyatakov instructed the accused Norkin
to prepare to set fire to the Kemero.vo Combined Chemical Works
when war broke out.
When examined on this point, Y. L. Pyatakov testified:
"Yes, I confirm it. I <lid in fact give such instructions to
Norkin. This was soon after my meeting with Trotsky, at
which the latter urged thait it was necessary to carry out
13

on the outbreak of war acts of diversion in enterprises working for defence. It was in this very connection that I spoke
with Norkin of providing for the possibility of committing
such an act of diversion in Kemerovo."
.
(Vol. I, p. 309.)
-In his turn, the accused Knyazev, during examination on December 14, 1936, tes.tified that in agreement with the paralle!l
centre he accepted from Mr. H--, an agent of the Japanese intelligence service, the following instruction to he carried out in the
event of war:
" ... to organize incendiarism at military stores, canteens
and army sanitary centres."
(Vol. XXXII, p. 68.)
Still more monstrous instructions aimed against the people
of the Soviet Union were received by the accused Knyazev from
the same agent of the Japanese intelligence service, Mr. H--.
" ... The Japanese intelligence service strongly stressed the
necessity of using bacteriological means in time of war with
the object of contaminating troop trains, canteens an.di army
sanitary centres with highly virulent bacilli.... "
(Vol. xx,~n, p. 68.)
The accused Knyazev's treasonable communication with the
Japanese intelligence service has been established not only by
Knyazev's own testimony, but also by his correspondence with
Mr. H--, found in his possession together with photographs
(letters from Mr. H--, one marked "15/XII" and arr.Other of
23/VIII-36).
(Vol XXXII, p. 121':-):-- The materials of the preliminary investigation, and the admissions of the accused S. A. Rataichak, I. A. Knyazev, Y. D.
Turok, G. E. Pushin, I. Y. Hrasche, A. A. Shestov and M. S. Stroilov establish that in addition to diversive and wrecking activities,
the Trotskyite parallel centre attached no less importance in the
struggle against the Soviet Union to the organization of espionage
for foreign intelligence services.
·
All the aforesaid accused, being in communi-cation with representatives of the Gern:i'an and Japanese intelligence services,'
regularly supplied them with secret information of the- utmost_
state importance.
For example, the accused /. A. Knyazev supplied the Japanese
_iritelligence service, through the aforesaid a•gent of this intelligence
service, Mr. H--, with secret information on it.he technical condi- .·.
tion of the Soviet raflways, their preparedness for mobilization !J
and about the transport of troops.
(Vol. XXXII, p. 103.} )j
14

•

_ The accused S. A. Rataichak, G. E. Pushin and I. Y. Hrasche
admitted that they were in communication with the German intelligence service, to which they handed secret information on the
condition and the operation of our chemical plants.
Examip.ed on ~is subject, the a~cused Hrasche testified that:
"The organization of which I was a member conducted,
on the iq.structions of the German intelligence service, not
only div.ersive aetivities, but also espionage activities in
chemical plants."
(Vol. XXI, p. 40.)
The aceused G. E. Pushin, after admitting that he had taken
part in espionage work, testified that he and the accused S. A. Rataichak were in communication with the German intelligence service through 1:he medium of Lenz, a fitter of the firm of Linde.
The aecused G. E. Pushin, during examination on October
26, 1936, testified:
"The following materials were handed to Lenz:
·'1} figures of the output of all Soviet chemical enterprises
during 1034;
"2) the program of work of all Soviet chemical enterprises for rn35;
"3) the plan of the construction of nitrogen works which
·comprised construction work up to 1938.
"I personally handed; all these materials to Lenz at different times in the first half of 1935.
"Moreover, Lenz informed me that he had received directly
from Rataichak figures of the output of the military chemical plants during 1934 and the program of their work for
1935. In addition to· this, I systematically supplied Len::.
with information on stoppages, breakdowns and the condition of the equipment of nitrogen plants."
. . (Vol. XIX, p. 31.)
-Similar espionage work for the German intelligence service
was also .carried on by the accused A.· A. Shestov and M. S. Stroilov, who are convicted of criminal communication with a number
of intelligence service agents who arrived in the U.S.S.R. in the
-guise of foreign specialists; for example, engineer Stickling, who
was sentenced in Ure Kemerovo ca·se for espionage and diversive
work.
,,
The espionage activities of Ute Trotskyites on behalf of the
~µerman intelligence service were covered up in a number of cases
i,by their connections 'Y"ith certain German firms.
• · The investigation in the present case has established that an
~agreement was concluded between L. Trotsky and certain German
15

firms by virtue of which these firms financed the Trotskyites
from a fund formed by raising the price of goods imported into
the U.S.S.R. from Germany.
·
On this point the accused Pyatakov, referring to his conversation with Trotsky's son, L. L. Sedov, now in emigration,
t_estified:
" . . . Sedov conveyed to me Trotsky's instructions to
try and place as many orders as possible with the firms
Demag and Borsig, with whose representatives Trotsky has
connections.
"You, added Sedov, will have to pay higher prices, but this
money will go for our work."
{Vol. I, p. 227.)
In their plans to overthrow the Soviet government and seize
power, L. Trotsky and the parallel centre attached prime importance to terrorist acts against the leaders of the Communist Party
of ilhe Soviet Union and of the Soviet government.
The preliminary investigation in the present case has established that on direct instructions from L. D. Trotsky received by
Y. L. Pyatakov and K. B. Radek, the parallel Trotskyite centre
organized a number of terrorist groups in Moscow, Leningrad,
Kiev, Rostov, Sochi, Novosibirsk, and other towns.
According to the testimony of accused K. Radek, L. D. Trotsky
demanded

" . . . the organization of a small group of reliable people

to carry out terrorist attempts on the lives of th;.~ leaders
of the Communist Party of the Soviet .Union, and primarily
against Stalin."
(Vol. V. p. 102.)
L. D. Trotsky gave similar instructions to the accused Pyatakov during their conversation in 1935.
The accused Pyatakov testified that
'I

" . . . during this conversation Trotsky said: 'You must
understand that withoot a whole series of terrorist acts,
which must be carried out as soon as possible, Stalin's
government cannot be overthrown.
" 'The struggle must be sharpened still more, must be ex-'
tended. \Ve must, literally, stop a~ nothing to -overthrnwStalin.'"
(Vol. I, pp. 263, 264.)
. · These are the instructions that L. D. Trotsky, the agent of
fascism, gave the Trotskyite organization, which was preparing::
a number of terrorist acts against the leaders of the Communist:
.Party of the Soviet Union and of the Soviet gov/e'mment.
l
In organizing the aforementioned terrorist acts, the Trotsky-$
'~

16

:i

ite centre tried to take advantage for this purpose of the visits
leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and of the
Soviet government made. to various places in the country. ·
Tims, in 1934, when Comrade V. M. Molotov, the Chairman
of the Council of People's Commissars of the U.S.S.R., was in
Siberia, the Trotskyite terrorists, under the leadership of the accused Shestov, attempted to kill Comrade V. M. Molotov by causing an automobile crash.
The accused -Arnold, a member of the T,rotskyite terrorist
group, the direct perpetrator of this dastaroly crime, testified during examination on this point on September 21, 1936:
"In September 1934, I do not remember the exad dia.te,
Cherep'ukhin ,called me into his office and warned me that
Molotov was to arni.ve in Pro:kopyevsk. . . . He thereupon
stared that I must saJccifice myself, and .al .a1'1 costs cause
the car I was driving, which would ibe placed at Molotov's
disposal, to icrash. I agreed and replied that everything
would be done."
(Vol. XXXVI, pp. 32, 33.)
The accused Shestov confirmed this by testifying as follows:

"In 1934, on Muralov's instructions, I made active prep- arations for a terrorist act against Molotov, the Chairman
of the Council of People's Commissars of the U.S.S.R., and
Eiche; the secretary of the West-Siberian Territory Committee of the Communist Party."
(Vol. .XV, p. 157.)
The attempt on the life of Comratde V. M. Molotov, the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the ·U..S.S.R., by
overturning the car in w.hich he rode from the dispatch office of
Pif No. 3 (Prokopyevsk mines administration) to the wo;ikers'
settlement, was in fact made, hut with· no results.
.
.
(Vol. XXXVI, p. 48.)
Such are the vile, treasonable, anti-Soviet activities of the
Trotskyites, the contempHble faS>Cist hirelings, traitors to their
.conn.try and enemies of the people.
Having suffered utter <lefeat in their profonged struggle against
1he Party and the Soviet government, deprived, as a result of the
c0mplete victory of socialism in the U.S.S.R., of all support among
!the masses of the people, and constitU1ting an isofated and politicalijy 'doomed group of bandits and spies, branded with universal
ftjmtempt by the people of t'he Soviet Union, L. D; Trdtsky an(i
1!lls·- accomplices-Pyatakov, Radek, Sokolnikov, Serebryakov,
t1~itz, and :11e otfo:rs accused in t.he present case, outrageously
~~Layed the mterests of the working cl.ass and the peasantry,

~·

..... '

11

betrayed their country and became an agency of the German and
Japanese fascist forces for espionage, diversive and wrecking
activities.
DEFINITION OF THE CHARGE

The investigating authorities consider it established:
1} that, on the instructions of L. D. Trotsky, there was organized in 1933 a parallel centre consisting of the following accused in the present case: Y. L. Pyatakov, K. B. Radek, G. Y. Sokolnikov, and L. P. Serebryakov, the object of which was to direct
criminal anti-Soviet, espionage, d.iversive and terrorist activities for the purpose of undermining the military power of the
U.S.S.R., a'Ocelerating an armed attack on the U.S.S.R., assisting
foreign aggressors to seize territory of tile U.S.S.R. and to dismember it and of overthrowing the Soviet power and restoring
.capitalism and the ntle of the bourgeoisie in the Soviet Uriion;
2) that, on the instructions of the aforesaid L. D. Trotsky,
this eentre, through the accused Sokolnikov and Radek, entered
into communication with representatives of certain foreign states
for the. purpose of organizing a joint struggle against the Soviet
Union, in connection with which the Trotskyite centre undiertook,
in the event of its coming into power, to grant these states a number
of political and economic privileges and territorial conce.5sions;
3) that, moreover, this centre, through its own members and
other members of the criminal Trotskyite organization, systematically engaged in espionaoge on behalf of these states, supplying
foreign intelligence services with secret information of the utmost
state importance;
~-- .
4) that, .for the purpose of undermining the econornJic strength
and defence capacity of the U.S.S.R., this centre organized and carried out a number of wrecking :and diversive acts at certain
enterprises and on the railways, which caused loss of human life
1
and the destruction of valuable state property;
5) that this centre prepared a number of terrorist acts against
the leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and of
the Soviet government, and that attempts were inade to carry
·out these acts;
6) that besides its leaders-the accused Y. L. Pyatako·v, G. Y.
Sokolnikov, K. B. Radek and L. P. Serebryakov-the -following..
accused took an active part mthe aforesaid criminal activities of
this centre: Y. A. Livshitz, N. I. Muralov, Y. N. Drobnis, M. S. Boguslavsky, I. A. Knyazev, Y. D. Turok, S. A. Rataichak, B. 0. Nor~
kin; A. A. Shestov, M. S. Stroilov, I. Y. Hrasche, G. E. Pushin
pind V. V. Arnold. · .
·
All the accused have pleaded guilty to all the charges pre:.:
18

ferred against_ them and stand convicted by the documents in the
file, by the material evidence, and by testimony of witnesses.
On the aforementioned grounds the following persons:
I) Pyatakov, Yuri (Georgi) Leonidovich, born 1890, employee;
2) Sokolnikov, Grigori Yakovlevich, born 1888, employee;
3) Radek, Karl Berngardavich, born 1885, journalist;
4) Serebryakov, Leonid Petrovich, born 1888, employee
-are accused· of having, as members of the anti-Soviet underground Trotskyite centre, committed treason against their country
by committing the crimes enumerated in paragraphs 1-6 of the
De-finitiori. of the Charge, i.e., crimes covered by Articles 58 18, 58 8, 589 and 58 11 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
5) Livshitz, Yakov Abramovich, born 1896, employee;
6) Jfuralov, Nikolai Ivanovich, born 1877, employee;
7) Drobn'is, Yakov Naumovich, born 1891, employee;
8) Boguslavsky, Mikhail Solomonovich, born 1886, employee:
9) Knyazev, Ivan Alexan.drovicih; born 1893, employee;
10) Rataichak, Stanislav Antonovich, born 1894, employee;
11) Norkin, Boris Osipovich, born 1895, employee;
12) Sheslov, Alexei Alexandrovich, born 1896, employee;
13) Stroilov, Mikhail Stepanovich, born 1899, employee;
14) Turok, Yosif Dmitrievich, born 1900, employee; 15) Hrasche, Ivan Yosifovich, born 1886, employee;
16) Pushin, Gavriil Efremovich, born 1896, employee;
17) Arnold, Valentin Volfridovich (alias Vasilyev, Valentin Vasilyevich), born 1894, emrployee
-are accused of having, as active members of the aforesaid
anti-Soviet underground Trot.skyite organization, committed treason
against their country iby committing crimes enumerated in paragraphs 1-6 of the Definition of the Charge,i.e.,crimes covered by Articles 5818, 58 8 , 589 and 5811 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
L. Trotsky, and his son, L. L. Sedov, now in emigration,
once again convicted by the materials in the present case as the
direct leaders of the treasonable activities of the Trotskyite centre,
in the event of their being discovered on the territory of the
-U.S.S.R. are subject to immediate arrest and trial by" the Military
Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
_ On the aforementioned grounds, an<l in accordance with the
:,decision of the Central Executive .Committee of the U.S.S.R. of
·July _10, 1934, all the aforementioned persons are subject to trial
,by the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U$.S.R.
»,·:
The present indictment was drawn up in Moscow ori January
;;c,_~9. 1937.'
A. VYSHINSKY

~~

Procurator of the U.S.S.R.
19

The President: AccW?ed Pyatakov, do you plead guilty to the
.charge brought agaiMt you?
Pyatakov: Yes, I dlO.
The President: Accused Sokolnikov, do you plead guilty to
the charge brought against you?
Sokolnikov: Yes, I do.
The President: Accused Radek, do you plead guilty?
Radek: Yes, I do.
The President: Accused Serebryakov, <lo you plead gui~ty?
Serebryakov: Yes.
The President: Accused Livshitz, do you plead guilty?
Livshitz: Yes, I do.
The President: Accused Muralov, do you plead guilty?
Muralov: Yes, I do.
The President: Accused Drobnis, do you plead guilty?
Drobnis: Yes, I do.
The President: Aceused Boguslavsky, do you plead guilty?
Boguslavsky: Yes, I do.
The President: Accused Knyazev, do you plead guilty?
Knyazev: Yes, I do.
The· President: Accused Rataichak, do you plead guilty?
Rataichak: Yes; I do.
The President: Accused Norkin, do you plead guilty?
Norkin: Yes., I do.
The President: Accused Shestov, do you plead guilty?
Shestov: Yes., I do.
The President: Accused Stroilov, do you plead1 guilty?
Stroilov: Yes, I do.
~-- .
The President: Accused Turok, do you plead guilty?
Turok: I do.
The President: Accused Hrasche, do you plead guilty?
Hrasche: Yes, I do.
,.
The President: Accused Pushiin, do you plead guilty?
Pushin: I do.
The President: Accused Arnold, do you plead guilty?
Arnold: Yes, I do.
·
The President: Adjourmnent for 15 minutes.

..

*

-~:

*

The President: The session is resumed. ComTade"-Procuratei:,.
what proposals have you to make as to the procedure of the court
investigation?
Vyshinsky: I propose that the court investigation shouJld begin
with the examination of the accused; the witnesses should be questioned in the cour:se of the court investigation and of the examination of the accused, whenever it is found necessary to ascertain
20

or to clarify any particular cirnumst.ances of the case. I would request that the accused be examined in the following order: that
Pyatakov be examined first, followed by Radek, Sokolnikov and
Serebryakov; that after them we examine Drobnis, Muralov, Bo' guslavsky, Norkin, Shestov .and Stroilov; that then we examine the
railway group: Livshitz, Knyazev and Turok; then RaWchak,
Hrasche, aITTd Pushin and conclude with the examination of
Arnold.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any objections?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)_
The President: Have the accused any objections?
The Accused: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: The Court confirm.S the procee&ngs for the
court investigation proposed by the Procurator.
The first to be examine<l is the accused Pyatakov. Hao the
Procurator any questions?
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): TeU us, \Vhen did1 the last period of
your ·underground Trotskyite activities begin?
Pyatakov: In 1931-this was the lai.St period, not counting
1926-27.
Vyshinsky: What did your activities consist of?
Pyatakou: In 1931 I was in Berlin on official business. At the
same time there were several Trotskyites there, among them
I. N: Smirnov and Loginov. I also rwas accompanied hy MoskaIyov. Shestov was there too. In the middle of the· summer of 1931
Ivan Nikitich Smirnov told me in Berlin that the Trotskyite fight
against the .Soviet government and the Party leadership was being
resumed with new vigour, that he--Smirnov-had had an interview
in Berlin with Trotsky's son, Sedov, who on Trotsky's instruction
·gave him a new line, which was t'hat mass methods of struggle
should1 be abandoned and that the principal method of struggle
that should he adopted was the method of terrorism and, as he
then expressed it, the m-ethod of counteracting the measures of
the Soviet government. ·
Vyshinsky: When was that?
Pyatakov: I cannot now rememlber the month exactly, hurt it
was in the middle of the summer.
Vyshinsky: Where were yQU working then?
Pyatakov: I wai.S then working in the Supreme Council of
. National Economy as Chairman of the Central A<lminis.tration of
· Chen;rical Industries.
~; 'Yyshinsky: And where w.as Smirnov working?
~' Pyatakov: Smimov was working on the Central Administration
ftfor the Transportation Machinery Industry. ·
~}~· Vyshinsky: Which Smirnov are you referring to?
t,·.

21

Pyatakov: The well-known Trotskyite, Ivan Nikitich Smirnov.
Vysliinsky: The one who was put on trial?
Pyatakov: Yes, the one who later belonged to the united Zinovievite-Trotskyite centre.
Vyshinsky: How did you meet him-in connection with business or specially in connection with your underground affairs?
Pyatakov: I find it difficult to answer this question because
I also met him on a number af occasions in connection with official
business. During one of these meetings, when there was nobody in
my office, he ibegan to tell me about the resumption of the Trotskyite struggle and of Trotsky's new line.
It was th.~n that Smirnov tdLd me fuat one of the reasons for
the defeat of the Trotskyite opposition in 1926-27 was that we
confined ourselves to one country, that we did not seek support
albroad. It was then also that he conveyed to me that Sedov wanted
very much to see me, and he himself recommended me to meet
Sedov, because Sedov had a special message for me from Trotsky.
I agreed to this meeting. Smirnov gave Sedov my telephone
number and we made arrangements about the meeting over the
telephone. There is a cafe known as "Am Zoo" not far from the
Zoological Gardens, on the square. I went there and saw Lev Sedov
sitting at a small table. We hadi known each other very well in
the past. He told me that he was not speaking to me in his own
name, but in the name of his father-Trotsky, and that Trotsky,
learning that I was in Berlin, gave him categorical orders to look
me up, to meet me personally and to have a talk with me.
Vyshinsky: I have one question to ask before you""go on to
describe your conversation with Sedov. After the conversation.}Yith
Smirnov of which you just spoke, how much time elapsed before~
you went to Germany?
Pyatakov: The conversation with Smirnov took place in Germany, in Berlin. 'Ve were all :there on official business.
Vyshinsky: Prior to your departure for Ger.many and prior t<f
your meeting there with Smirnov, did you meet Smirnov in Moscow or anywhere on the territory of the Soviet Union?
Pyatakov: Yes, there were such meetings, but ·these meetings
were of a business character. The meetings in Moscow did not
bear a definitely counter-revolutionary Trotskyite character. The
first frank conversation with Smirnov took place in B_erlin_. _ -----~
Vyshinsky: And it was there that he put you in touch with
Sedov?
Pyatakov: Yes, Sedov said that Trotsky had not for a moment,
-abandoned the idea of resuming the fight against Stalin's leader~~
.ship, that !here had been a temporary lull owing partly to Trotsky~s:~
r.epeated movements from one ::untry to another, but that

thi1

struggle was now being resumed, of which he, Trotsky, was hereby
informing me. Further, that there was being formed, or had already been formed-I cannot now recall-a Trotokyite C€ntre. It
was a question ·of uniting all the forces capable of waging a fight
against Stalin's leadership. The possibility was being sounded of
restoring the united organization with the Zinovievites.
Sedov also said that he knew for a fad that the Rights also,
in the persons of Tomsky, Bukharin andi Rykov, ha<l not laid down
their arms, that they had only quietened down temporarily, and
that the necessary connections should be established with them too.
This was a prelude, one might ·say, a testing 9f fue ,ground. After
this Sedov asked me pointblank: "Trotsky asks. do you, Pyatakov, intend to take a hand in this fight?" I gave my consent.
Sedov made no concealment of his great <lclight over this. He
said that Trotsky had never doubted that despite our quarrel in
the beginning of 1928, he would nevertheless find in me a reliable
comrade-in-arms.
After this Sedov went on to outline the nature of the new
methods of struggle: there could be no question of developing a
mass struggle in any form, af orgapJzing a mass movement; if we
adopted any kind of mass work we would come to grief immediately~ Trotsky was firmly in favour of the forcible overthrow of
the Stalin ~eadership by methods of terrorism and wrecking. Sedov
further said! that Trotsky drew attention to the fact that a struggle
confined to one country would be absurd and that the international
question could not possibly be evaded. In this struggle we must
also have the necessary solution for the international problem, or
rather, inter-state problems.
Whoever tries to brush these questions aside, said Sedov,
relating what Trotsky said, signs his own "testimQnium paupertatis."
This, in fact, brought my first meeting with Sedov to a close,
and, in fact, I ought to date my re-entry into the Trotskyiite
·counter-revolution from this meeting.
Vyshinsky: Did you tell any of your confederates '<libout this
meeting?
·
·
Pyatakov: Yes, I <lid, I told it lo Vladimir Logiinov, who was
manager of the Coke Trust; l told it to Bitker, who was working
in Berlin; I told it to Shestov, who was on the same commission
,that was placing orders for the coal indllLstry; I told it to my
~tary, "',ho was not only m.y secretary but also a man I trusted'l?W{oskalyov.
;j.' Vyshinsky: May I question Shestov?
f,
.p The President: You may.

:~

23

Vyshinsky: Accused Shestov, you have heard Pyatakov's testimony?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did. you meet Pyatakov in Berlin _in 1931?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Were you at that time a member of his commission?
Shestov: Yes, I.represented the Eastern and Siberian Coal Syndicate on Pyatakov's commission.
Vyshinsky: Did the accused Pyatakov inform you of his ·meeting with Sedov?
Shestov: Yes, he did.
Vyshinsky: Did he tell you what he diseussed with Sedov?
Shestov: Yes, that was what we talked! about.
Vyshinsky: Do you confirm what the accused Pyatakov just
stated as regards his conversation with SedlOv?
Shestov: Yes, I do.
Vyshinsky: It was this that Pyatakov toltl you about at the
Ume?
·
Shestov: Yes, but he spoke of it in a more extended form.
Vyshinsky: How did he extend that form?
Shestou: He said the following, that the industrialization being
carried out by Stalin won't stand any criticism.
Vyshinsky: Who was it that told you that?
Shestov: It was Pyatakov that told me that at the time.
Vyshinsky: Were they his own word5, or was he conveying the
words of Sedov?
"'""
Shestov: As I understood it, Pyatakov wa.s conveying .hi.s .own
words and this coincided with what I learned from the tafk with
Sedov just previously.
Vyshinsky: Who had a talk?
Shestoll: I personally.
Vyshinsky: Of this· later. Now, what do you know abouf"'the
conversation between Pyatakov and Sedov?
Shestor>: Pyata kov said atthe time that l'he construction of giant
mines, Stalin's idea of the Urals-Kuznetsk Complex was. built on
sand. To prove this he began, pencil in hand (he actually took up
a pencil), to calculate how much a ton of metal would oos.t· obtained at Magnitka with coal from the Kuznetsk Basin., a, to_n_of
metal at the Kuznetsk Woiiks secured from ore. . . .
Vyshinsky: And what was the conclusion?
Shestov: The CQIIlClusion was that these plants would not pay.
Vyshinsky: ·whose opinion was that?
.
Shestov: I 'lllld.erstood that it was Yuri Leonidovich's OP.inion.
Vyshinsky: When he told you of his conversation with ISeoov;~
1

24

·-

·.~

did Pyatakov agree with Sedov, or did he reproduce this conver.sation photogrophicall.y?
·
Sh-estov: He undoubtedly agreed.
Vyshinsky: Did he try to convince you?
Shestov: Yes.
_
_
_
Vgshinsky: You were still not convinced at that time?
Shestov: I had been sufficiently convinced by my conversation
with Sedov, an_d then there were two conversations with Smfrnov.
Vyshinsky:- Did I rightly under.stand you to say that when
informing you of his conversation with Sedov, Pyatakov fully
agreed with Sedov's line?
Shestov: Yes.
_
_
_
_
Vyshinsky: And he tried to influence you to accept this line?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions to as:k Shestov. Permit m-:
to ask Pyatakov a question. Accused Pyatakov, do you agree with
what Shestov said?
Pyatakov: Shestov perhaps talked with somebody, but not
with me when he says that somebody with pencil in hand calculated the cost of ore. There was no such conversation with me.
Vyshinsky: When you told Shestov of yaur conversation with
Sedov, did you lend it the character of a mere communication, or
did_ you ait the same time state what your own alfJtihide was?
Pyatakov: Both with Shestov and with Vladimir Loginov, I
discussed the carryd.ng out of this directive.
Vyshinsky: Do I rightly understand you lo say- that you met
Sedov in Berlin in 1931 and talked ®out fighting the Soviet
government and; .the Party, that you expressed the opinion that
industrialization would fail, and so on?
- . Pyatakov: About the failure of industrialization I did not yet
at that time say what my stand was, but at any rate I spoke about
resuming the fight against the leadership, and on this question
J did say what my stand was.
Vyshinsky: You considered it necessary to resume this fight?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How is it to be explained that you so quickly consented to resume this fight against the Party and the Soviet gov· ernment?
\; - Pyatakov: The talk with' Sedov was not the cause of this, it
()Illy served as a fresh impetus.
-':_, Vyshinsky: Consequently, you held your old Trotsikyite position
~~n before this?
.
·
.
.
.
1A:· Pyatakou: Unquesitionably, the old Trotsky1te views still sur:
:,P!ed in me, and they subsequently grew more and more.
f~.h Vyshinsky: And by 1931 had grown sufficiently?
~-

-

H

-

Pyatakov: By 1931 there had taken shape in my mincL definite
differences with the leadership of the Party on the grounds of the
-complete removal of Trotsky from the leadership and his banishment abroad, and because Kamcnev and Zinoviev were not being
given any leading Party and government work.
Vyshinsky: Such was your first conversation with Sedov?
Pyatakou: Yes.
Vysliinsky: Were you to meet Sedov again in Berlin?
Pyatakov: During the first meeting rwe agreed not to meet again
because it was rather difficult for me to do so. I was fairly well
known in Berlin, portraits of me were published in the newspapers,
and it was therefore not very convenient for me to meet. ...
Vyshinsky: That is, for reasons of secrecy?
f,yatakov: Yes, for those reasons. However, some time after the
first meeting, I think it was three weeks later, four weeks at most,
Ivan Nikitich Smirnov again came to me and said that Sedov asked,
despite our agreement not to meet, to meet a second time for a very
brief and very necessary talk.
Vyshinsky: So Smirnov all the time played the part of contact
man, of go-between?
'
Pyatakov: It was apparently easier for him to meet Sedov, so
that in that sense he was a go-between for Sedov and me. At any
rate, I endeavoured to meet him as little as possible for reasons
of secrecy, but agreed to this meeting because Sedov was very
insistent about it. And we met in the same ·place as the first time.
This time the conversation was very brief.
_
Vyshinsky: Wa.s the time and place of meeting arranged hy
you directly with Sedov or through Smirnov?
~-- ·
Pyatakov: I told Smirnov that in order not to make any further arrangements about where to mee1:, we would meet in the same
place.
Vyshinskg: Where you had met the first time?
i:
Pyatakov: This second conversation was very brief; it lasted
not more than 10 or 15 minutes, perhaps even' less, and amounted
to the following.
.
Without any beating about the bush, Sedov said: "You realise,
Yuri Leonidovich, that inasmuch as the fight has been resumejl'.
money is needed. You can provide the necessary fund~ for waging:
the fight." He was hinting that my business position enable(f:riiet:o.,
set aside certain government funds, or, to put it bluntly, to ste:if4
Sedov said that only one thing was required of me, nameJy,:fj
that I should place as many orders as possible with two Genii.ml~;
firms., Borsig and Demag, and that he, Sedov, would arrange
to receive the necessary sums from them, bearing in mind th. I would not be pairticularly exa:t;ng as to •prkes. If this were d.'

ciphered it was clear that the additions to prices that would be
made on the Soviet orders would pass wholly or in· part into
Trotsky's hands for his counter-revolutionary purposes. There the
.second conversation ended.
· Vyshinsky: Who named these firms?
Pyatalcov: Sedov.
Vyshinsky: Did you not enquire why he named these firms
particularly?
_
Pyatakov: No. He said that he had connections with these firms.
Vyshinsky: You had connections with other firms as well?
Pyatakov: Y.es, I had very many connections. But Sedov mentioned these firms, apparently because it was with them that he
had connections.
Vyshinsky: C'Ollsequently, it was clear to you that these particular firms were mentioned by Sedov for specific reasons?
Pyatakov: Of course, that is what he said!.
Vyshinsky: And what was the nature of these connections?
Pyatakov: I have just said that I do not know. He, Sedov, said
that since I, Pyatakov, could not .steal money, what was required
of me was to place as many orders as possible with the firms I have
mentioned.
Vyshinsky: And those firms were named by Sed'o.v himself?
Pyatakov: Yes, and he added that he would secure the neces·sary sum from them.
Vyshinsky: You did not ask how, through whom'?
Pyatakov: I considered it inconvenient to ask that.
Vyshinsky: -Were you personally connected with represen-tatives of these firms in a conspiratorial way?
Pyatakov: No. True, I had connections with the chief of the
-~ Demag firm, but I never permitted ·myself to speak of these
~subjects in order not to compromise myself and give myself away.
~- Vyshinsky: And you did what Sedov advised?
~--, -Pyatakov: Quite correct.
fr _ Vyshinsky: Tell us, what form did this take?
' - Pyatakov: It was done very simply, particularly since I had
· _ery many opportunities, and a fairly large number of orders went
"'"'j-Q:iese firms.
;' -_ Vyshinsky: Perhaps orders were given to these firms because
,-- twas more advantageous to us?
fl!yatakov: No, not tfor that reason. As to Demag, it could be
p.e very easily. Here it was a question of prices; it was paid more
,:~ - generally speaking, it should have been paid.
-~ Vgshinsky: 'Ilhat means that you, Pyataikov, by virtue of an
27

arrangement. with Sedov, paid the Dem.ag firm certain excessive
sums at the expense of the Soviet government?
Pyatakov: Unquestionably.
Vy shin.sky: And the other firm?
Pyatakov: As regards the Borsig firm, a certain amount of
effort was required.
Vyshinsky: It was more advantageous to place the orders with
other firms?
· Pyatakov: · Dem.ag in itself is a high-class firm and . no
effort was required in recommending that orders be placed with
it.
Vyshinsky: All that was required was to make a big addition
in prices?
Pyatakov: Yes. But as regards Borsig it was necessary to persuade and exercise pressure in order to have orders passed to this
firm.
\
Vyshinsky: Consequently, you also paid Bonsig excessively
at the expense of the Soviet government?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, from the standpoint of the interests
of our industry .and our state, it was not advantageous to place
orders with Borsig, and it was advantageous to place orders
with other firms, but nevertheless you, guided by criminal motives, ·deliberately placed orders with the Bor&ig firm.
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: By virtue of your agreement with Sedov'?
Pyatakov: With Sedov.
""::'.'
Vyshinsky: And did not Sedov tell you that Trotsky ha<l:an.
arrangement with these firms?
·
Pyalakov: Of course, that is what he began with. Only he did
not say what exactly the conditions were, what the technique was.how it would be done.
Vyshinsky: And what did he say?
. Pyotakov: He said that if I placed orders with these firms he ·
would receive money from these firms.
Vyshinsky: By agreement?
; ;j
Pyatakov: Yes.
.
-~~
ing~yshinsky: This conversation took place at the se~o~d--~~-t~i

Pyatakov: Yes, at the second meeting.
. -~:
1
. Vyshinsky: Did you tell anybody about this meeting ·wi '
Sedov?
:
__ Pyatakov: This meeting was of a strictly secret character·ari
it would not do to say much aboui it.
•.•
28

Vyshinsky: Did Sedov at this meeting tell you anything that
might be of interest to you in connection with your counterrevolutionary work in the iriimediate future? _
Pyatakov: Not at this meeting. At this meeting I told Sedov
that I had certain interesting questions that I wanted transmitted,
since I was interested not in his, Sedov's, opinion, but in the opinion of Trotsky, and Sedov could not give me the explanation I
wanted. This ooncerned; as Sedov at the time expressed it, "eounteracting the measures of the Soviet government." As a matter
of fact it was a question of wrecking activities. I requested that
on this subject he should get me supplementary explanations from
Trotsky. Sedov said that he··had sent a letter to Trotsky and was
awaiting a reply.
Vyshinsky: He had not yet got a reply?
Pyatakov: No. I told him~that there were certain Trotskyites in
Berlin, and that if he woul<f not be able to give me the reply directly, in the event of my departure he could transmit the reply
to me through trusted persons. I then named Shestov. In addition,
I named Bitker and Loginov.
·
l'yshinsky: Did you tell Shestov himself anything about this?
Pyatakov: That I cannot recall now. Shestov himself received
commissions from Sedov.
Vy-shinsky: Did you receive anything from Sedov through
Shestov?
Pyatakov: Yes. In December 1931 I was in Moscow. On his return from Berlin, Shestov came to .see me in the Supreme Council
of National Economy, in my office, and handed me a letter.
Vyshinsky: What post did you occupy at that time?
Pyatakov: I cannot now recall what post I held .
. Vyshinsky: The post can be ascertained by enquiry. Did Shestov
come to see you on business?
Pyatakov: He came to hand over Trotsky's letter and to discuss
once moce the de\"elopment of Trotskyite work in the Kuznetsk
Basin.
\f· · . Vgshinsky: At whose orders was he sent there?
~" Pyatakov: He had worked there previously.
~.· Vyshinsky: He had no official business with you?
~,;, Pyatakov: No, but he could always find a business pretext.
~> - Vyshinsky: Shestov did not come to see you because business
Mtiired
it?
r.;.:,, ;_
•
lL1:yatakov: No! he came to execute the .cor:1mission he had
'~e1ved and to discuss once more the orgamzahon of Trotskyite
rk in the Kuznetsk Basin.
\~¥:yshinsky (to Shestov) : Did you go to see Pyatakov?

I

,.

29

Shestov: Yes, I did. It was in November 1931.
Vyshinsky: In November or December?
Shestov: It was after the holidays, because roughly between
November 20 and 30 I was already in Novosibirsk.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): Is it possible that he came to see you
:at that time?
Pgatakov: It is possible.
Vyshinsky: We must make this point clear. In what month did
he come to see you?
Pyatakov: It is possible that he came in November; I cannot
recall precisely.
Vyshinsky (to Shes.tov): You assert that you went to see Pyatakov in November. How do you make sure that it was in November?
Shestov: I recall that I came to Moscow on November 7,
because the trams were not running. I remember that fact very
well. I remember equally well that in the early days of December
I was already working as Chief of the Mine Construction Trust in
the .Kuznetsk Basin.
Vyshinsky: Therefore you could not have visited Pyatakov in
December?
Shestov: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: We-can therefore regard it as established that your
meeting with Pyatakov took place in the middle of November
1931?
.
Shestov: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: Did you have any business purpose?
Shestov: No, I went to fulfil Sedov's commission-t<ijland over
a letter. That was the first reason, and the second reason ~s-lo
obtain brief instructions in organizing Trotskyite activities.
Vyshinsky: And you received these instructions?
•
Shestov: Roughly what Pyatakov then said was: "Go and set
the work going as quickly and energetically as possible."
i
Vyshinsky: Undermining work, was it?
Shestov: Undermining work and wrecking activities.
Vyshinsky: And as to the rest, you would see for yourself on
the spot?
Shestov: Quite right.
,
Vyshinsky: You handed over.a letter? From whom Q.i«;l_y~u receive it?
·--:
Shestov: I received th~ letter from Sedov in Berlin.
· ·)~
Vyshinsky: Through somebody else?
-'g~
Shestov: No, from Sedov personally.
, 3~
Vyshinsky: Where did you receive the letter? .
·
~:I
Shestov: I received it in the Baltimore Restaurant, a place p~~
30

,.JB

viously agreed upon. I learned about this meeting place from
Schwartzniann. I recall that when I came from England I went to
Schwartzmann- and told him that I must see Sedov.
Vyshinsky: Why did you need Schwartzmann?
Shestov: I had- met Sedov in January, and Sedov then acqtiainted me .with this Mr. Schwartzmann.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, you had had meetings with Sedov
and Schwartzmann before?
Shesto~: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: So you met Sedov through this Schwartzmann?
Shestov: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: But in 1931 you received the ietters not from
Schwartzmann, hut from Sedov personally?
Shestov: Yes, from Sedov.
_
Vgshinsky: In a place previously agreed upon?
Shestov: It was in the Baltimore Restaurant, a place previously
agreed upon.
Vyshinsky: And how~did you arrange the time for the inter'iew in this conspiratorial meeting place?
Shestov: I told Schwartzmann that I wanted to see Sedov.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, through Schwartzmann you arranged to meet Sedov?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What did Sedov tell you?
Shestov: He simply handed over to me then not letters, but,_
as had been agreed upon, a pair of shoes.
· Vyshinsky: So you did not receive letters but shoes.?
Shestov: Yes. But I knew that they contained letters.
Vyshinsky: So you were giv~n letters contained in shoes?
:.7:._ Shestov . . Yes.
;f,.
Vgshinsky.· in which shoe were the letters-:..in the right or the
d.eft?
~'.\, Shestov: A letter was secreted in each shoe. He said that
~ere were marks on the envelopes of the letters. On one there
~s the letter "P"-tfo_1t meant that it was for Pyata.kov, and
'' P'.:the other was the letter "M"-that meant that it- was for
~;~·:u·OV.

r,:,W'yshinsky: .You gave a letter to Pyatakov?

-.,t Sh~stov: I gave him the letter marked "P."
J; '.Vyshinsky: From which shoe, from the right or the left?
~hestov: I cannot say exactly'.

Jg_shins_ky: And_ the other letter? . .
;. hestov: The other letter marked "M" I gave to Muralov.
31"

Vyshinsky: May I question Muralov? Accused 1'.foralov, did you
receive the letter?
M uralov: I did.
Vyshinsky: 'Vith a shoe or without a shoe?
Jluralov: No, he brought me only a letter.
Vyshinsky: Did he bring you the letter sealed or unsealed?
Jfuralov: Sealed.
Vyshinsky: What was on the envelope?
Jfuralov: The letter "M."
Vyshinsky: Did you unseal it in Shestov's presence· or later?
Muralov: I do not remember now.
Vyshinsky: I• have no more questions to put to Muralov and
Shestov. (To Pyatakov.) What more can you tell us of your
criminal Trotsk.yite, anti-Soviet activities?
Pyatakov: I received a letter which looked liike the one Shestov
has just described, and on opening it I was extremely surprised:
I had1 expected a note from Sedov, but it turned out that the
envelope contained not a note from Sedov, but from Trotsky, and
the letter was written in German and signed "L. T."
Vyshinsky: That is to say, you received a letter from Trotsky
through Sedov and Shestov?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What was in this letter?
Pyatakov: In this letter, which was written in German . . . .
Vyshinsky: You know German fairly well?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you write and read it quite fluently?:
Pyatakov: I do not write it quite grammatically, but I read-it~
·quite fluently and also converse.
Vyshinsky: What did the letter say?
Pyatakov: The letter, as I now recall, began as follows: "Dear
fdend, I am very glad that you hrnve followed my requests ... ."f
It went on to say that fundamental tasks were facing us, which he .;
briefly formulated. The first task was to use every means to remove :;
Stalin and his immediate assistants. Of course, "every means" was ;I
1o be understood above all as violent means. Secondly, in this,:
-same note Trotsky spoke of the necessity of uniting all anti-Stalint
forces for this struggle. Thirdly, of the necessity of co~JJ.teractirig.'
all the measures of the Soviet government and the Party, espedil y,/
in the economic field.
Vyshinsky: And how was it to be COU:nteracted?
. ;
P!falakov: That was left to our discretion here.
:'
Vyshinsky: What did you do with this letter or in connectio
With this letter?

r

32

Pyatakov: Here I must make a fairly long digression. I am at
present testifying to my connections. with Trotsky and Sedov. I
will then go on to testify to what I did here in the Soviet Union.
Vyshinsky: That would be ihe right thing to do, because that
will best elucidate the character of your activities at that period.
You received this letter at the end of November 1931?
Pyatakov: Yes, at the end of November 1931.
Vyshinsky:, Shortly -after receiving this letter you again went
abroad; in what year was that?
Pyatakov: In 1932.
Vyshinsky: When exactly?
Pyatakov:- It was in the second half of 1932 and I then met
Sedov for the third time.
Vyshinsky: What did you do in the inter~al between the receipt
of the letter from Trotsky in 1931 and your second appearance in
Berlin in 1932?
·
Pyatakov: At that time I was engaged in restoring the old
Trotskyite contacts. l concentrated chiefly on the Ukraine. When
I spoke to Loginov in Berlin we came to an agreement regarding
the organization of a Trotskyite centre in the Ukraine. The contact
with this centre was my principal contact, if we do not count a very
important contact I subsequently had with Western Siberia and
with N: I. Muralov which began through Shestov.
Vyshinsky: When did these contacts start?
Pyatakov: From the time Shestov went there.
Vyshinsky: What interests me is another question. The interval
between the end of 1931 and your journey to Berlin; I understand
that you devoted this time to restoring the Trotskyite cadres.
- Pyatakov: The connections.
__ Vyshinsky: Connections with the scattered Trotskyite cadres?
Pyatakov: Yes.
- Vyshinsky: Concretely, what was this expressed in?
. Pyatakov: First of all we restored the Ukrainian connections.
~:these wer-e, Loginov, Golubenko, Kotsyubinsky and Livshitz, acXCu.sed in the present case. We arranged, first with Loginov and later
Iwith the rest, that they form the Ukrainian "four."
~iii Vyshinsky: With whom of the four did you speak about this?
· W:' Py-atakov: With all four.·
·· Vyshinsky: Including Livshitz?
· Pyatakov: Yes.
·
-'Vgshinsky: This was in 1931?
- Pyatakov: I think it was even 1932.
,Vyshinsky: Where did the meeting with Livshitz take place?
·Pyatakov: In my office at the People's Commissariat.

33

Vyshinsky: Did you invite him, or did he come of his own
accord?
Pyatakov: I do not remember.
Vysbinsky: Where was Livshitz working at that time?
Pyatakov: In the Ukraine, as chief of a railway.
Vyshinsky: You had no official business with the chiefs of
railways. Why did he come to see you at the Supreme Council of
National Economy?
. Pyatakov: I had had long-standing and personal relations with
hl~
.
Vyshinsky: Personal relations don't interest me.
Pyatakov: We had long been connected in counter-revolutionary, Trotskyite work.
Vyshinsky: What reason was there in 1931 for a chief of a
railway to visit you, the Vice-Chairman of the Supreme Council
of National Economy? Was there any official business reason for
this?
Pyatakou: There was no need for that. I used to have many
:visitors and he dropped in too.
Vyshinsky. But he did not merely come to -see you as an
acquaintance?
Pyatakov: Of course, he had been infornwd by Loginov.
Vyshinsky: Hence, he came to see you, Pyatakov, as the man
who, on Trotsky's instructions, was .getting togeth~r Trotskyite
cadres?
Pyatakou: No. He came because he wanted to get from me personally a eonfirmation of what Loginov had told him.~=
Vyshinsky: And did you say anything to him about this?-::-- -·
Pyatakov: I told him about my meeting with Sedov and
conveyed to him Trotsky's directives about terrorist methods of
struggle, about wrecking.
Vyshinsky: As a visitor, as Livshitz, your personal acquainif
tance, or as a participant in your underground work?
Pyatakou: Formally, as a personal acquaintance, but actu-·
ally we discussed the Ukrainian Trotskyite group.
Vyshinsky: After your return from Berlin?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Hence, after your return from Berlin,__ yoll _ ~~t­
Livshitz twice?
Pyatakov: I think more than twice because he came to talk
with me at the People's Commissariat whenever he was in Moscow, but I cannot remember the various conversations.
_ Vyshinsky: Accused Livshitz, do you confirm this part of
Pyatakof's evidence concerning your meeting with him?
s~·

LirJshilz: Yes, I confirm it.
Vyshinsky: You met him after his return from Berlin; <li<l you
go· to see him or did he come to see you?
.
.
Livshitz: I went to the Supreme Council of National Economy.
\'yshinsky: Did he invite yo.u, or did you go of your own
accord?
·
·
Livshitz: I went to verify the correctness of the instructions
Loginov had c_onveyed to me from Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: ·Hence, Loginov conveyed to you, from Pyatakov,
Trotsky's instructions?
Livshitz: Yes.
- Vyshinsky: Where?
Livshitz: In Kharkov.
Vyshinsky: And you, when in Moscow, decided to verify this?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And for this purpose, what did you decide to do?
Livshitz: I came to Pyatakov to. hear it from him.
Vyshinsky': And he?
Livshitz: Pyatakov told me the same thing that Loginov told
me: that the methods of struggle that we had employed before had
been ineffective and that we must now adopt new methods, that is,
terrorism and work of destruction.
Vyshinsky: Who told you that?
Livshitz: Pyatakov told me that.
Vyshinsky: In 1931?
Livshitz: No. In 1932.
Vyshinsky: After his return from abroad?
Livshitz: After his return from Berlin. And in 1931 I had a
.meeting with .Pyatakov in my railway car which to()k place before
his.departure for Be11lin.
Vyshinsky: The second time?
·.;: Livshitz: I cannot say for certain whether it was the first or the'
second time; but apparently that was in November or December
c 1931. He was in my railway car, had dinner, b,.ut no conversation
J5'.lf a Trotskyite-counter-revolutionary character took place.
~'F · Vyshinsky: At that time?
~-gu.~ivshitz: At that time, because there were many people in the
'' · Vyshinsky: But besides that time, had he been in your car on
-~ occasions?
, ,;iLivshitz: Besides-that time, as far as I remember, he never was
· Jiiy car, he was there only once.
}/Yyshinsky: Did any other Trotskyite conversations take place
-~~een you after that?
{'

85

Livshitz: Certainly. _,
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions to Livshitz. Accused
Pyatakov, perhaps you are tired?
Pyatakov: No, I can go on.
The President: I propose to adjourn at 3 o'clock.
Vyshinsky: I do not object, but perhaps it is tiring for the
accused?
Pyatakov: How much longer?
· The President: Fifty minutes.
Vyshinslq/: And so, let us take up the question of your second
visit to Berlin.
Pyatakov: I visited Berlin a second time in the middle of 1932.
Sedov learned of my arrival in Berlin and decided to see me in
order to receive from me, as he said, necessary information for
Trotsky.
When I began to relate to him what I then knew about the
activities of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite organizatio~ which were
beginning to develop he interrupted me and said that he knew all
about that as he had direct contacts in Moscow and he wanted me
to tell him what was being <lone in the provinces.
I told him about the work of the Trotskyites in the Ukraine
and in Western Siberia, about the contacts with Shestov, N. I.
Muralov and Boguslavsky who were in Western Siberia at that
time.
Sedov expressed extreme dissatisfaction, not his own, as he
said, but Trotsky's dissatisfaction with the fact that things were
moving very slowly, particularly in regard to terrorisf:'.'activities.
He said, "You are engaged all the time in orgianizationa'l prep'arations and conversations, but you have nothing concrete to show."
And he also said to me: "You know the sort of man Lev Davidovich is, he is roaring and raving, burning with impatience to have
his instructions carried out as quickly as possible, and nothinf
concrete is visible from your report."
Vyshinsky: Did you stay long in Berlin that second time?
Pyatakov: About six or eight weeks. In the autumn of that
year I returned to Moscow and here my meeting with Kamenev
took place, which was very important from the point of view qf
forming the reserve centre, what became later the para~lel Trotskyite centre.
··· · - ·--Kamenev came to visit me at the People's Commissariat on some;
pretext or other. He very clearly and distinctly informed me aboutµ
the Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre which had been formed. He sai.I
. ·_;
that the bloc had been restored; then he mentioned the names of a
number of people who belonged to the centre and informed·a:ti'.
8&.

?

that they had discussed the question of including in the centre
people who in general had been prominent Trotskyites in the past,
such as rnyself-Pyatakov, Radek, Sokolnikov and Serebryakov,
.but they had come to the conclusion that this was inexpedient.
As Kamenev said, they were of the apinion that the danger of the
chief centre being exposed was very great as its members were
all "very besmirched" people. That is why it was desirable, in
case the main centre was e:x:posed, to have a reserve TrotskyiteZinovievite centre. He had been authorized officially to ask me
whether I would agree to join that cenf;re.
Vyshinsky: Reserve, as he ex'Pressed it?
Pyatakov: Reserve. I gave Kamenev my consent to join the
reserve centre. This was in the autumn of 1932. Kamenev informed me o!f the main lines of the work of the Trotskyite-Zinov:ievite centre. First of all, he said, the fundamental thing was the
questi.on of overthrowing the government by terrorist methods.
And then he conveyed to me the directives on wrecking.
Continuing liis information, he said that they had established
closest connections, not merely contact, but connections, with the
Rights: Bukharin, Toonsky, and Rykov, and immediately added:
"As you, Yuri Leonidovich, are on very good terms with Bukharin,
it would do no harm if you, too, maintained the necessary contact
with _him." Which is what I subsequently did.
Vyshinsky: Hence, you established contact with Bukharin?
Pyatakou: Yes. In reply to my question: "But, how is it that
we are establishing.contact with the Rights?"-Kamenev bluntly
said that I was just betraying a certain amount of childishness
in politics, that yesterday's disagreements could not disunite us,
as there was unity of aim: the overthrow of Stalin's leadership
anq abandoriment of the building of socialism with a correspond'ing change in the economic policy. During the same conversation
r.Kamenev also spoke about "inter-state" relations and said that
without the necessary contact with the governments of capitalist
:countries we would never come into power and that these contacts
·:had- to be maintained. As for details, he said that I, Pyatakov,
:.wa:s not a "foreign affairs man," and that Radek and Sokolnikov
<were better informed on these matters.
1; - · Vyshinsky: \Vhat does it mean-you are not a foreign affairs
.
. man.?
:; ; Pyatakov: In Trotskyite circles I was regarded more as a spe~list in economic matters and not as a specialist on international
~~estions.
·
c_-Vyshinsky: Who, then, were regardied as foreign affair~
eri?
_ /'
·· ·
-: 'Pyatakou: I have alreadiy told you: Radek and Sokolnikov.

F
I:

31

Vyshinsky: Although you are not a foreign affairs man, you,
neverthele!;s, discµssed international questions.
Pyatakov: I have said briefly that there were three conver-sations: the first with Smirnov, and then with Sedov and with
lfamenev.
Vyshinsky: With the united centre as represented by Kamenev?
Pyatakov: That is all I sai-d.
Vyshinsky: Continue.
Pyatakov: So that was the conversation with Kamenev in 1932.
Vyshinsky: The end of 1932?
Pyatakov: Yes, end of 1932.
Vyshinsky: What did you n_egotiate about with them in 1932?
Pyatakov: In 1932 I had a conversation with Radek. During
this conversation he said that we ought to adopt th~ methods of
struggle adopted lby Trotsky and ·the main united TrotskyiteZinovievite centre.
It was during this conversation with- Radek that we discussed
the question about the very great predominance of Zinovievites in
the main centre, and whether we should not raise the question of
making certain changes in the composition of the main centre.
Vyshinsky: In which direction?
Pyatakov: In the direction of introducing more of the Trotskyite
faction in the Trotskyite-Zinovievite united! bloc.
We arrived at the concllLSion that the question of changing the
composition of the centre could not be raised then as it would
give rise to absolutely unnecessary disputes in the Twtskyite underground organization.
-:,:_,_
The idea occurred to- us that in a·d-dition to the rmain cen_!re
consisting of Kamenev, Zinoviev, ?.-frachkovsky, Bakayev, Smirriov;~
Evdokimov and others, we ought to have our own Trotskyite parallel centre which could serve as a reserve centre in case the
main centre was exposed, and which at the same time would carry
on practical work independently in accordance with Trotsky's(
directives and his lines. It is true that at that time there was already
no particular difference between our line and that of the Zinovie:v- .
ites. But at that time Radek and I were disturbed ·by the thought~
that in the economic retreat after we had seized power the Zino- :]
vievite section of the bloc would go too far, and something had to:~
be organized to counteract it.
-- - .: __ -:\l
At an events, we then agreed to ask Trotsky's 0-pinion abouti~
this. A little later (this was already in 1933), during one of .mj!
tjleetings with Radek, he informed me that he had receiv: ; '
l;l- reply from Trotsky, that Trotsky categorically urged the neceS
sity of presening complete unity as well as the bloc with the ZinoVi
ieVites since there were no d·isagreements with them whatever i;,
r·

38

asmuch as the terrorist and wrecking platform had been accepted.
As for the retreat, Trotsky wrote that Radek and I were mistaken
in U1inking that the retreat would be inconsiderable-we would
have to retreat very far, and on this was based the bloc, not only
·with the Zinovievites, but also with the Rights. As for converting
our centre into a parallel centre, he said that this would accelerate
the gathering of forces and preparation of the necessary acts of terrorism and wrecking.
At the cnd'of 1933 f met Serehryakov. We then agreed that, in
the main, I would be in diar.ge of the work in the Ukraine and
\Vestern Siberia, and in industry, and he would take Transcaucasia
and transport.
I met Sokolnikov much later, in the middle of 1935, when we
spoke concretely about converting the reserve, or parallel, centre
into an operating centre, since at th~t time the main centre had
been broken up and its members arrested and sentenced. Sokolnikov came to see me at the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry and said that it was time to become active as a certain lull
had set in after the arrests.
Vyshinsky: You will speak about 1935 later. For the present
let us deal with your conversations with Radek and your conversations with Serebryakov. Thus, you, already at that time, that
is in 1933, informed Radek and Serebryakov about your criminal
activities, about your intentions and undertakings?
Pyatakov: Of course, I did not inform them rubout all the details, because at that time, and for a considerable time after, the
·organization was built on the basis of personal contacts, which
were not communicated by one to the other; but I informed them
; about what we had in the Ukraine, what we had in Western Siberia; by that time a group had been formed in the Urals and also
;;in Moscow. I informedi them in general outline.
Vyshinsky: Did you see Radek before the letter was sent to
nri'rotsky asking for his opinion about these questions; or after?
!:'i. Pyatakov: About the parallel centre?
i#~; Vyshinsky: Yes.
~t. Pyatakov: No; it was during the conversation with Rad~k that
~!:we both decided to send this letter.
Vyshinsky: An~ later you re~ived a reply from Trotsky?
.,. :Pyatakov: Yes, m the affirmative.
, .Vyshinsky: Who received this reply?
Pyatakov: Radek, and Radek conveyed it to me. He came to my
!lrtment and sa-idl that he had received a reply from Trotsky in
_"ch the laUer categorically brushed aside all doubts about the
'g,c with Zinoviev and, on the contrary, raised the question of
~~pc with the Rights; he said that our line concerning the ex-

i

39

tent of the retreat was wrong. In regard to converting the "reserve centre" into a "parallel centre" he gave us his blessing. This
was in 1933.
Vyshinsky: Hence, we can take it that the "parallel centre"
had been operating since 1933?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: It was a parallel centre prncisely because it operated
simultaneously with the main centre?
Pyatakov: Yes~
Vysliinsky: Accused Radek, what have you to say about this
part of Pyatakov's evidence?
Radek: I fully confirm it.
Vyshinsky: You discussed the question of asking Trotsky's
opinion about the "parallel centre"?
Radek: Yes. We examined this question from if:he point of view
of the composition of the main centre and from the point of view
of our political distrust towards the Zinovievite section, notwith·standing the fact that there was a bloc between us.
Vy.~hinsky: How is that to •be understood?
Radek: We became convinced that this bloc could hardly stand
the strain of a serious test. One of the first things Zinoviev would
be concerned about would be to push aside the Trotskyites: the
personal factor would play an important role. Kamenev and Sokolnikov would go considerably farther in that economic retreat which
we considered·necessary, while Zinoviev would fall into utter panic.
It was necessary, while outwardly preserving the bloc, to have our
own organization to counter-balance it.
Vyshinsky: To pursue your own policy?
Radek: Our own policy, or our own corrective to tfiat policy.
To have our own organization.
Vyshinsky: So as to keep the Troitskyite-Zinovievite centre in
hand?
Radek: Yes, but needless to say this differentiation betwefiil the
Rights, Sokolnikov, ourselves and the Zinovievites, was pure illu- :
sion. This illusion was soon wrecked by the facts, but at that time ;
we proceeded from this, and this was the subject .of the conversa-~1
tion between Pyatakov and me. On the strength of this conversa- 1
tion during which we also examined the economic prospe<;ts, w:e5
decided that we must abandon all idea of placing__a_Iarger numheri
of Trotskyites on the old centre, or of eff<>cting changes iri itseom:'.;
position.
If you take the composition of the old centre you will Jm_
that the Trotskyites did not have a single one of the old po __
tical leadiers on it. There were Smirnov, who was more of an org , '
izer than a political leader; Mrachkovsky, a soldier and a fighfuf
40

man and Ter-Vaganyan, a propagandist. \Ve fully tru.!ted them
personally, but we did not think they were capable of really leading, in case anything happene~L We thought that since the centre
had already been formed, any changes in it would give rise to disagreements with the Zinovievites and that is why we tried to apply
the idea of a reserve centre in the form of a parallel centre. We
decided to ask Trotsky's opinion.
Vyshinsky: Who wrote to Trotsky?
Radek: I wrote the letter.
.
Vyshinsky: How dlid you convey this letter to him?
Radek: I established communication through Vladimir Romm~
an old friend of mine, -who at that time was a Tass correspondent
abroad. I also received the reply through Romm. I burned the
letters as soon as I received them, but Pyatakov knows about all
the details concerning ,our communications with Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: Hence you confirm this part of Pyaiakov's evidence?
·
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky (to Serebryakov): What have you to say aibout that
part of Pyatakov's evidence in which reference is made to your
participation?
Serebryakov: It is true, at the end o.f November 1933 I met
Pyatakov in Gagri.
· Vyshinsky: \\"'hat dud you talk about?
Serebryakov: Pyatakov briefly informed me about his meeting with SOOov and about the work he was carrying on in the
Ukraine and in Western Siberia. He asked me to undertake the
work of directing the contacts with Georgia and in· the transp9rt
system.
·
Vyshinsky: Why did he turn to you for contacts with the Geor·gian Trotskyites?
Serebryakov: I was on good ternns with t'he Georgian Trntsky1ites, particularly with Mdivani; I visited Georgia, Transcaucasia,
frequently. And as for transport, I was an old transport
man.
,;., Vyshinsky: And did you consent?
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: He told you that you were invited to participate in
ithe reserve centre?
~i>:;. Serebryakov: Yes.
'
Vyshinsky: And you also consented to that?
~ :- Serebryakov: Yes.
" VyshinsJ...11: Hence, you confirm this part of Pyatakov's evi-·
ce?
· Serebryakov: Yes.
'

41

Pyatakov: I ask permission to make a remark.
The President: You may.
Pyatakov (to Vyshinsky): Serebryakov di-d not reply to your
question quite exactly. i\{y relations with him were not as between
·leader and subordinate. It was not that I made proposals to him
and he consented; we simply came to an agreement about this,
Vyshinsky: \Vho was more influentiail in your "four," you or
Serebryakov?
·
Pyatakov: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: \Vhat does Serebryakov bhink?
Serebryakov: I do not speaik from the point of view of division
-of responsibility. From that point of view I bear full responsibility
for the activities of the centre; but I must say that for me Pyatakov
is an authority. And, to some extent, I was an authority for him.
Vyshinsky: Did you have direct communication with Trotsky?
Serebryakov: No.
Vyshinsky: And he?
Serebryakov: He had communication.
Vyshinsky: This also affected authority?
Serebryal.:ov: It did.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): In your "parallel centre" no one
had the leading role in relation to the rest?
Pyatakov: No, no one.
Vyshinsky: All were equal members, and each one was fully
Tesponsible for tlie whole centre?
Pyatakov: Yes. each one in his own sphere. In the sphere of
international questions Sokolnikov and Radek were the ~pthorities.
ln the sphere of industry and economy, apparently r was..Jl)e
~th~~
- .
Vyshinsky: What interests me is, under whose leadership did
'the "parallel centre" operate?
Pyatakov: Trotsky's.
Vyshinsky: \Vho on behalf of the centre had direct communif
-ca_tion with Trotsky?
Pyatakov: Radek; and later, I personally met Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: A personal meeting with Trotsky· belongs to the
·
·sphere of communication with Trotsky?
Pyatakov: Of course.
Vyshinsky: Hence, the centre, through you and Radek, ..wasjn·
direct communication with the principal leader of your criminal
activities?
Pyatakov: Correct.
%
. Vushinsky: It is only in this sense that I put the question. Rav~~
you any other corrections to make?
···:,I:
Pyatakov: No.
·~
42

;;

Vyshinsky_: Thus, 1933 is the year in which the activities of
the parallel centre took shape?Pyatakov: Quite correct.
Vyshinsky: What practical measures did the centre carry out
in the course of 1933-34?
Pyatakov: It was precisely in 1933-34 that organizational and
preparatory work was developed in the Ukraine and· in W estem
Siberia; fater the Moscow group was formed. Work was developed
in the Urals, and all this work began to assume the form of the
practical fulfilment of Trotsky's instructions, which I mentioned
before, concerning the application of wrecking and diversive methods.
Vyshinsky: Hence, in 1933-34, under the direotion of the
"parallel centre," local Trots\kyite nuclei arise and take shape,
particularly in Western Siberia, in the Urals n,nd in the Ukraine?
Pyatakov: By that time Trotskyite groups had appeared -in Kharkov,_ Dni•epropetrovsk, Odessa and. Kiev.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, the centre already had its nuclei?
Pyatakov: Yes. And they proceeded to carry out measures of
a criminal character.
Vyshinsky: Which measures?
Pyatakov: In the Ukraine the work was carried on mainly in
the coke. industry by Loginov and a group of persons connected
with him. Their work, in iJhe main, consisted of starting coke
OHms which were not yet really ready for operations, and of holding up the construction of very valuable and very important parts
of the coke and chemical industry. They operated coke ovens
without utilizing those very valuable by-products which are
obtained in coking and thereby huge funds were rendered valueless.
_ Vyshinsky: That was in the Ukraine. What about the other
places?
Pyatakov: In Western Siberia, in Kemerovo, Norkin, one of the
accused in the present case, operated. He was assisted by his chief
engineer, Kartsev; later, in 1934, I sent there Drobnis, also an ac.cused in the present case, to accelerate our work as Norkin had
complained to me that he found it difficult to cope with it alone.
Vyshinsky: You sent Drobnis to Kemerovo especially for the
·purpose of intensifying the wrecking activities?
.. Pyatakov: I assigned Drobnis wider tasks. In sending him to
~western Siberia (I had discussed with Sedov the question of send~ng Drobnis, as Trotsky knew him personally very well) I pursued
J~ doublp, aim: on the one hand to activize the wor'k of the West; Si:berian centre, and on the other hand, to give Norkin the neces43

sary assistance in carrying out wrecking work at the Kemerovo
plant.
Vyshinsky: As far as wrecking was concerned, we can formulate it as follows: that Drobnis was sent for the purpose of
intensifying criminal wrecking activities? ·
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In what capadty did you send Drobnis there?
Pyatakov: Drobnis was sent as assistant cllief af construction.
Vyshinsky: You sent him as assistant chief of construction <tnly
formally?
Pyatakov: It was necessary to send an assistant there in any
case.
Vyshinsky: There was suoh a vacancy?
Pyatakov: Yes, and I took advantage of that to send Drobnis
there for our Trotskyite purposes.
Vyshinsky: You sent him as assistant chief of construction and
at the same time for the purpose oif destroying construction?
Pyatakov: Yes. In the Kuzbas wrecking work was being actively
carried on by Shestov, who had received direct instructions from
Sedov and from myself. In the Urals, Yulin's underground group
was being formed, and by that time was already connected with
Mednikov's group, and others.
Vyshinsky: All these groups were organized, took shape and
carried out their rcriminal activities under your direct guidance?
Pyatakov: Of course.
Vyshinsky: Through an intermediary link like the WestSiberian centre?
"':
Pyatakov: No. The \Vest-Siberian centre was directly conn~cted
with me. E~ch one hard his own group.
Vyshinsky: So this was a sort of ladder system?
Pyatak.ov: It was a very complicated system. Here, and during
the preliminary investigation I testified on this; the thing is nov
always clearly pictured. It was a very complicated, illegal organization, in very complicated and difficult conditions, for it was based
on personal contacts as well as on illegal meetings. This work was
carried on in great conspiracy. That is why I was not informoo
about many contacts. In fact I had a limited circle of people with
whom I permitted myself to have dealings.
'
Vyshinsky: To what extent were the other memfiers of -th~
centre informed about your activities?
Pyatakov: Radek and Serebryakov were informed about tihem.
l informed Sokolnikov later, only in 1935.
Vyshinsky: Hence, we can draw the following conc:Iusion: this
was the practical activity, not only of yourself, but of the whole .
parallel centre?

Pyatakov: Of course.
Vyshinsky: What was your offi.cial position in 1933-34?
PyatakoP: I was Assistant People's Commissar of Heavy Industrv.
Vyshinsky: Hence, it was easier for you to utilize your contacts
for Trotskyite machinations?
Pyatakov: Yes, I .plead guilty to this.
The President: The. procedure of the session will be as follows: \Ve shall start the morning sessions at 11 a.m., adjourn for
dinner at 3 p.m. to .6 p.m., resume at 6 p.m. and continue until
10 p.m.
·
The Court will now adjourn until 6 p.m.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

}.

45

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

EVENING SESSION, JA~UARY 23, 1937, 6.00 P.M.

· _Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: The session is resumed. Comrade Vyshinsky.
have you any questions?
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): Tell us of the specific wrecking work
of the Trotskyite organizations you know about.
Pyatakov: I have already testified that wrecking activities were
devefoped in the Ukraine, chiefly in connection with the coke and
chemical industry. The wrecking activities consisted in the fact
that newly-built coke ovens were put into operation in a still unfinished condition, as a result of which they rapidly deteriorated.
an<l, chiefly, the chemical sections of these plants were being
delayed or almost not 'being built at all, thsnks to which the vast
means invested in the coke and chemical industry were rendered
valueless to the extent of one-half, if not two-thirds their worth.
The most valuable part of the coal, its chemical content, was not
utilized and was allowed to escape into the air. On the other hand,
new coking batteries were damaged. The \Vest-Sibedan Trotskyite
group carried on active wrecking work in the coal industry. This
activity was carried on by Shestov and his group. ~.re was .a
fairly large group there which chiefly worked along the lines_ of
causing fire.c; in the coking-coal mines. \.Vrecking work was eon:'.
ducted in the Kemerovo Combined Chemical Works. At first the
work consisted in delaying the putting into operation of newlybuilt units, funds were diffused on secondary units. with the result that vast structures were in a perpetual state of constructiorf
and were not brought to a state where they could be put info
operation. \Vith regard to ele~tric power stations, work was performed aiming at reducing the effective power resources of the
whole Kuznetsk area.
Vyshinsky: Did Norkin, Kartsev and Drobnis know of this
work?
-· - -----Pyatakov: Yes, they di.d. Muralov and Boguslavsky of course
knew about it.
In the Urals there were two main objects on which wrecking
.activities were concentrated. One was the copper industry and th:~,;
other was the Urals Car Conistruction Works.
<~i
In the copper industry efforts were chiefly directed towar~1
'46

i

preventing the copper plants that were in operation from being·
utilized to their full capacity. The Krassno-Uralsk Copper Works.
and the .Karabash Copper Works did not fulfil their program of
production; there was a tremendous waste of the copper delivered
to the works and there were tremendous losses. The Karabash
\Vorks were in a perpetually feverish state. At the Kalatinsk Works.
the concentration plant worked badly all the time; wrecking activities were being carrieq on there too.
Vyshinsky: And who .specifically, personally, carried on thework of wrecking?
Pyntakov: In the main this work was cari:ied on ·by Kolegayev-the manager of the Central Urals Copper Trust.
VyshinsJ.:y: Did he carry it on on his own initiative, or on
instructions?
Pyatakou: In general all this was -not done on these people's.
own initiative but on Trotsky's instructions, andi then on my own
personal directives.
A big copper plant, the Central Urals Copper \Vorks, was
being built in the Urals, which was to increase the coppersupply of the country very considerably. But at this plant, first
Yulin-the chief of the Central Urals Copper Construction-and
then Zharikov carried on wrecking activities which chiefly aimed
at dissipating resources, not carrying construction work to completion and generally dragging it out.
It must he said that when I visited this construction site in thespring of 1935 I saw that the wrecking work was being carried
on so unscrupulously crudely that even the most superficial observer could see that all was not right on the job. I was obliged
to instruct Zharikov. chief of the construction, to be more cautious, to manceuvre in some way or other, to show at least some
e'nergy on the construction job, to begin construction work, but at
any rate so calculated as not to complete it.
Also in the Urals criminal activities were being carried on in
connection with the copper industry and the living conditions of
the workers at the Central Urals Copper Construction, and in
·Krassno-Uralsk, chiefly in respect to the location of the workers'
residential settlement. \Ve brought it one or two kilometres nearer
to the plant, which, generally speaking, is forbidden by the sanitary
law, inasmuch as tl:tis is a production injurious to health. On the
, other hand, the building of the workers' residential settlement
_was generally delayed, and an intolerable situation was created
the Central Urals Copper Construction. The whole idea of the
[Central Urals Copper Works project was that it should
~£ombine the metallurgical part and the chemical part. The chem~~l part was not being built at all. I arranged it so as to separate

•on
v' ,.
ti

47

the chemical part by handing it over to Rataichak at the Central
Administration of the Chemical Industry, where it was completely
pigeon-holed. But if the construction of the plant itself went badly,
the ore supply base was .even in greater arrears. I personally, in ad9ition to aU the rest~ separated this ore base from the construction of
the plant with the idea that the ore base should not be made ready.
Now as regards the car construction wor~ in the Urals, where
the chief of construction was Maryasin, a Trotskyiite and a member
of the Urals group. The government devoted great attention to this
plant and assigned it very considerable funds so as to get it completed as soon a~ possible, because this :plant alone was to turn
out more cars than all the other car construction works put
together.
·
Maryasin carried on the wrecking work a1ong the following
lines. First of all he sank money in piling up unnecess:u:-y materials, equipment and so on. I think that iby the beginning of 1936
about fifty million rubles were frozen in the form of materials.
Then as to the quality of the building work. Building work was
systematically delayed on the large-part construction department,
the tool department and the central car assembly department.
The wrecking activities in the last period assumed new forms.
Despite the fact that, after a delay of two or three years, the plant
began to enter on its operation stage, Maryasin created intolerable
conditions, fomented fotrigues, and in a word did everything to
obstruct operation.
On the whole, this is perhaps all there is to be s:iid about the
Urals.
ci',.
As to Moscow, definite work was carried on here in the ch..emical industry by Rataicha'k.
- ·
Vy.;;hinsky: Cannot you be more explicit? W11at does "definite
work" mean?
. · Pyatakov: I am coming to it now. I want to fix exactly the
date on which my work with Rataichak commenced. Before being'
connected with me; Rataiehak was connected with Loginov.
Vyshinsky: ·From what date?
Pyatakov: Strictly speaking, he disclosed himself to me in
1934, and in 1934 I arranged with him that he would take charge
of wrecking activities in the chemical industry and would carry"
them on. As I knew Rataichak, I did not interfere in -his affairs._
very much, but I had a general idea of what was going on there.
Vyshinsky: Did you know Rataichak before 1934?
Pyatakov: In the course of our ordinary business .relations.
Vyshinsky: How long had you knO'\vn him?
Pyatakov: In the course of ordinary business relations1
Vyshinsky: Well, put it that way.
(8

Pyatakou: Since 1932, I think. In general, I knew him; but at
first, of course, I was wary with him until he disclosed himself
to me.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat gave Rataichak reasons for disclosing himself to you?
Pyatakov: Two persons had spoken to me about Rataichak:
Loginov spoke to me and Yulin spoke to. me.
Vyshinsky:. Did he disclose himself to you, or did you disclose
yourself to him?
Pyatakov: Disclosure may be mutual.
Vyshinsky: Did you disclose yourself first?
Pyatakou: \Vho first, he or I-the hen or the egg-I don't kno'w.
Vyshinsky: In short, you disclosed yourselves to each other?
Pyatakou: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And that was in 1934?
.
.
Pyatakov: Yes. We came to an arrangement. You.know, I may
not be able to tell everything now. Rataichak will supplement me
later.
·
Vyshinsky: Yes, later on we will question Rataichak.
Pyatakov: I can recall the following cases in this connection.
First of all an absolutely faulty plan of development was drawn
up for the war-chemical industry . . . a plan providing for a
smaller output capacity and, consequently, for a larger outlay of
capital than was required. This led to . . . I don't know, Citizen
Procurator, this is connected with certain military questions.
The President: That must be left for the session to be held in
camera.
Pyatakov: Then, in the sulphuric acid industry the c11ief thing
was that the capacities of the plants were concealed and minimized, with the result that the quantity of sulphuric acid which
could be produced \Ya!j· not produced.
As to the soda indillstry, despite the fact that our country
abounds in salt and raw materials for soda, and that the process
-0f manufacturing soda is very well known, there is a shortage of
soda in the country. The construction of new soda plants was
.-delaved.
Vyshinsky: What was the cause of that?
.
Pyntnkov: :r,f:v activities nnd those of Rataichak.
Vyshinskg: What activities? You had two kinds of activities<>fficial and secret.
Pyatakov: I am of course referring now to criminal activities.
The new plants that were projecled, like the ones at Usolye, Bas·kunchak and:so on, were delayed .in every way.
As regard's the nitrogen industry. Here boU1 Rataichak and
~9

Pushin, but chiefly Rataichak, had a hand in the wrecking activities \vith my direct pctrticipation. Here plans wen~ continually
revised, continua.Uy delayed, and in this way construction work
was delayed.
Vyshinsky: Artificially?
· Pyatakov: Well, of course. In spite of the decision of the government several plants were not being constructed at all.
Vyshinsky: Tell us about your diversive activities.
Pyatakov: As a rnaU.er of fact, it was all done on our instr_uctions and mine in particular. The line was indicated, but I cannot
say that I gave instructions to perform this or that particular
diversive act.
Vyshinsky: But was not this the case with Kemerovo?
Pyatakov: No, that also is putting it too definitely. I have
confirmed Norkin's testimony, and I now confirm lhat, in accordance with the directives I received from Trotsky, I told
Norkin that when \var broke out Kemerovo would apparently
have to be put out of adion by one means or another.
Vyshinskg: By one means or another, or did you speak of
definite means?
PyatakfJv: I cannot exactly recall now.
Vyshinsky: Comradie President, allow me to put a question to
Norkin.
The President: Accused Norkin .
.Vysbinsky: Accused Norkin, do you recall the conversation with
Pyatakov about putting the chemical works out of action in case
of war?
_.,
Norkin: It was said quite clearly that preparations mrrs:t-hemade so that the enterprises in the defence indusb·y -could be put
out of action !by means of ·incendiarism and explosions.
Vyshinskg: And do you remember whi;n he told you this?
_Norkin: In 1936, in Pyatakov's office in the People's Commio'f'
sanat.
·
Vyshinsky: Do you remember the deta.Us? \Vas there any talk···
of loss of human life?
....
Norkin: I remember it being pointed out that in general loss;i:
of life was inevitable, and that in carrying out diversive actsi,~i
you could not avoid workero being killed. Such an instructfon was;c'·
given.
Vyshinskg: Accused Pyatakov, do you remember whether yoi{
said this to Norkin?
-·
- Pyatakov: That is correct; I do not remember what wo ::
"·ere used, but this was the idea. The idea was to put the Kemeroi·
Combined \Vorks out of commission in war time; perhaps:r~
talked about special methods of doing this, and, of course, the
50

·was also talk about loss of life. I said to Norkin that since this
will be done, there will be <loss of Qife, and \ve will have to reckon
with this.
_
\'yshinsky: So that you regarded this as something inevitable?
Pyatakov: Of course.
Vyshinsky (to Norkin): Do you remember whether during the
preparations for thie explosions and in connection with the instruetions given on thi~-that workers may be killed-whether
Pyatakov spoke to you about it?
Norkin: He said sharply something to the effect that ·it was no
use being squeamish; there would be loss of life in carrying out
undermining work; what is there to embarrass you; what are you
worrying about! The working class in Leningrad and Moscow is
not what it was, let alone Kemerovo.You have nothing to hesitate
··about. That, -approximately, was how he put it.
Vyshinsky: And was there any talk about sheep?
Norkin: It is in general difficult to recall the exact formulation,
but it was quite sharp in the sense that we must stop at nothing
and pity nobody.
'
·
Vyshinsky: Was there anything said about the degeneration
of the working class?
Norkin: He said that the working class in Moscow and Lenin~
grad ·was not such as to deserve pity, let alone the workers in
Kemerovo.
·
·
Vyshinsky: Is that exactly the way he put it: Not such as to deserve pity, let alone the workers in Kemerovo? Do you remember
this conversation, Pyatakov?
. Pyatakov: I don't know, perhaps Norkin's memory is deceiving
hin:i. but I remember very well that I talked- about loss of life
·being inevitable, and talked about it quite sharply.
Vyshinsky: What he said was sufficiently sharp. How was
t.his sharpness expressed?
, Pyatakov: The sharpest thing was acts of diversion. _It was im·J?ossible to commit acts of diversion without sacrificing human

'life.
Vgshinsky: Did you say that the working class in general was:
:not what it had been?
h Pyatakov: In general, this does not fit in at all with my ideas.
~it is improbable, I spoke in other terms.
t1' Vgshinsky: In other terms?
Pyatakov: Since our line was to commit acts of diversion we
ould not bother _about any particular group of people who might
.ffer.
·

·
f

st

Vyshinsky: Accused Norkin, was there any talk as fo who was
to bear responsibility for these things?
·
Norkin: There »vas.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat was said?
..
.
Norkin: It was said that the responsibility would fail not on
those who performed the d.iversive acts but op the leaders of the
Party and the government.
·
·
Pyatakov: This was said.
. Vyshinsky: Were the members of your organization connected
with foreign intelligence service organizations?
Pyatakov: Yes, they were. I must return to the line Trotsky
laid down in order to make it clearer. As I have already testified,
I had fairly close and direct connections with Ra-dek. Radek directly established and maintained connections with Trotsky and
more than once received instructions from Trotsky .on· various
fundamental questions. Radek kept me continuously informed.
Whenever directives were received from Trotsky he would come
to see me the very same day or a few days after and tell me that such
and such directives had been received.
Vyshinskg: What did Radek tell you about these directives?
Pgatakov: There were no new directives specially about ter7
rorism; it was considered that this directive had been adopted
for execution, But there were repeated demands .and reminders
that this directive should be carried out.
Vyshinskg: \Vas this mentioned in the letter to Ra.dek?
Pyatakov: It was. Trotsky said that we were just talking.
Vyshinsky: What then did Trotsky demand?
."""'
Pyatakov: He demanded that definite acts should be commit~
ted both in the way of terrorism and wrecking. I must say, that
as the directive about wrecking activities encol).ntered fairly
serious resistance even among Trotsky's followers, it gave rise to
perplexity and dissatisfaction and did not go smoothly. We iI)'formed Trotsky of the existence of this state of mind. But Trotsky
replied in a letter couched in rather definite terms that the inslruction about wrecking activities was not something fortuitous,
not simply one of the sharp methods of struggle he proposed,
but an essential part of his policy and of his present line. In tl}e
same directive he raised the question-this was in the middle.of
1934-that IlO\'/ that Hitler had come to power ff was. quife
clear that his, Trotsky's line on the impossibility of building up
socialism in one country alone bad been completely justified, that
war was inevitable, and that if we Trotskyites wished to preserve
ourselves as a political force of some sort, we must in.advance, hav"
ing adopted a defeatist pos.ition, not merely passive~y observe and

52

contemplate, but actively prepare the way for this defeat But in
order to do so, cadres must be formed, and cadres could not ·be
formed by talk alone. Therefore the necessary wrecking activities
must be carried on now.
I recall _that Trotsky said in this directive that without the
necessary support from foreign states, a government of the bloc
could neither come to power nor hoM ipQiwer. It was therefore a question of arriving at the necessary preliminary agreetnent
with the most ·aggressive foreign states, like Germany and Japan,
and that he,· Trotsky, on his part had already taken the necessary
steps in establishing contacts both with the Japanese and the
German governmerits. ·
·
··
·
Her~ Trotsky expre.ssed dissatisfaction with our actions. He
had learned: th.at' Soko1nikov, in response to the direct demarche
of - - ·, the ·am'bassador of --_-· . . .
_ ·
The President: Accused Pyatakov, I categoncally forbid you
to mention the names of foreign represenf;atives in Moscow. If
you want to testify on. this subject, you can do so at the session
to be held in camera. ·
·
·
Pyatakov: Very well. Trotsky expressed dissatisfaction with
the fact that. Sokolnikov had no clear understanding of the steps
that were being taken by Trotsky and thai!: he did not support
them energetically enough.
_I further know that in accordance with Trotsky's instructions
Radek had meetings and conversations on·_ the lines of which
Trotsky had spoken.
Vyshinsky: ·with whom? Foreigners?
Pyatakov: With Germans, to put it plainly.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat oonversations did Radek have. with these
, Jiersons?
·
Pyatakov: Radek and I were constantly discussing this directive and, in general, we adopted the following position: since
we were· not quite -dear as to what Trotsky was doing abroad,
what connections he had, evidently, we here, if we met the official or unoffidal representatives concerned, would have to con.firm that Trotsky was acting not only individually, in his own
name, but also in the name of the bloc .. And this is what Sokol•nikov did .in conversation with one person, and what Radek did
in conversations with .other persons.
Yyshinsky: How do you know this?
Pyatakov: ·As regards Radek's meetings and conversations,
•Radek told me about them himself; and as regards Sokoinikov, I
"first learned about it from Trotsky's note, then Radek told me
;about it, and later; in the middle of 1935, Sokolnikov himself told
53

me of this step of his and recounted the conversation in which he
had sanctioned Trotsky's negotiations with the Japanese govern:ment.
Vyshinsky: Before you went abroad, had you no otl~er conversations with Radek on this subject?
Pyatakov: The characteristic feature of our criminal work in the
period from the middle of 1935 to the end of 1935 and the beginning of 1936 was that this was a period when the "parallel centre"
.~ndeavoured to convert itself from a pamllel centre into the main
~entre and to intensify its work in a~ordance with the directives
we had received from Trotsky, since at this time we had a number
of meetings here with Sokolnikov and Tomsky. In a word, we
.endeavoured to carry out the·decision of the main centre which
in 1934 had been transmitted! to all the four members of the
reserve centre: by Ramenev to me and Sokolnikovt and by
Mrachkovsky to Radek andi Serebryakov.
. · · ·
·
Vyshinsky: This was the time when Sokoln·ikov caine to see
you and sa~d: "I<t is time to begin"?
··
·
' · Pyata'kov: Yes. Just then the new phase began. This was the
first conversation in which I told Sokolnikov what we had, \.vhat
terrorist groups and Trotskyite organization we µQssessed. I told
:Sokolnikov, too, in general outline that wrecking activities were
being carried on along the lines required. Sokolnikov in turn told
me of the connections 11e had. He mentioned the Zaks-Gladnyev
·and Tivel groups.
· ·l remember that during this same conve,..<>ation much attention
was paid to the question of expanding the bloc. Both Sokolnikov
and I knew from Kamenev that the main centre had direct .aQd,
immediate organizational connections with the Rights. On tbe
'other hand, as I have already isaid, I had direct -contact with Bukharin, which was afterwards maintained by Ratlek.
' . Sokolnikov and I discussed the question at the ti'me and decided
: that it was absolutely necessary to give fonn to these relaticns in
some way, so as to organize the work directed towards overthrow-·
ing the gov('rnanent in conjunction with the Rights.
· .
We said at the time that it was absolutely necessary to meet,
'one of the leaders of the Rights, i.e., Rykov, Tomsky or Bukharin,!;
All three were discussed, but in the end the choice fell on Tomskyj~
bt>cause we had information that Tomsiky had the mostnUJP..ei'.9.~
and organized cadres and was best fitted to perform Eu~h illeg~lj
organizational work.
Sokolnikov undertook to meet Tom.sky, and. did meet hirrit
During the same period I met Serebryakov. And ·also in my CQP
ver,<>ation with Serebryakov we discussed the question of incr . :·
ing wrecking work on the railways and stimulating the work;'

·1:·

54

the Transcaucasian group·, which ~as to assume very definite
character at that time.
I repeat that I met Radek on more than one occasion in 1935
and conversed with him. ·
· After this firsL meeting with Sokolnikov he met Toinsky. I
also met Tomsky. I went to see him, I don't remember now
when that was. Then I met him again in' the middle or end Off
November. I met _Sokol~ikov again either at the end 'Of November.
or the beginnillg of December 1935. He told me that Ton:isky had
fully agreed to on organised joining of the bloc. I on my part
told Sokolnikov of the conversation I had had with Ton:isk.y
on this subjeot. In conversation with Q:le, Tomsky had] told ·me.
that he considered- it absolutely necessary to orgaruze ferrQl'ist
and all other kinds of work, but that he would have to consult
his comrades, Rykov and Bukharin. This he did later, and then
gave me a reply in the name of all three.
·.
Vgshinsky: Were negotiations conduct€'d with any member of
this group besides Tomsky?
:
Pyatakov: I did not conduct such negotiations. Radek had
<:onnections with Bukharin. I had had connections with Bukharin
until 1934, i.e., until the time he left the People's Commissariat.
While he was in the People's Commissariat it was easy for me to
meet him, but when he was transferred to Izvestia this connection
passed to Radek. He maintained and continued counter-revolut~ori­
ary connections with him.
.
A.bout the end of 1935 Ra<lek received a long letter-instruc~
tions from Trotsky. In thi·s directive Trotsky advanced two possible variants of our coming into power. The first variant was
the possibility of our cornillg into 1Power before a rw.ar, and the
. second variant, during a war. Trotsky visualized the first variant
resulting from a concentrated terrorist blow, as he said.
<What he had in mind was the simultaneous performance of ter~ rorist acts against a number of leaders of the C.P.S.U. and the So; viet government, and of course in the first place aga_inst Stalin and
:,his immediate assistants.
·
.. The second variant, which in Trotsky's opinion was the more
r;probable, was a military defeat. Since, as he said, war was inevit!;1able, and moreover in the very near future-a war in the first
i;piace· with Germany, and possibly-with Japan-the idea tht:re~'.fore was to reach the necessary a·greement with the governments
~~f these countries :md thus _ensure that they would regard the como power of the bloc favourably; and that meant obtaining the
essary support to maintain ourselves in power by making a
mher of concessions to •these counf.r·ies on terms to be agreed
beforehand. But since the question of defeatism, of military

·as

F

55

wrecking activities, of inflicting telling blows during wartime
both to the rear and to the army was here put pointblank, this
very much disquieted Radek and myself. It seemed to us that the
ceason why Trotsky was staking on the inevitability of defeat was
largely because of his isolatiQn and ignorance of the real conditions, his. ignorance of what was going on here, his ignorance of
what the Red Army was lik,¢;
that was why he cherished such
illusions. Both Radek and I therefore decided that it was neces.:.
sary to eiidea.vour to meet Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: Accused Radek, d1id you in 1935 or somewhatear11er
receive two, or perhaps more, letters from Trotsky?
Radek: One letter in April 1934 and another in December 1935.
Vysliinsky:
their oo;n:tents tally with what Pyatakov has
stated here?
Radek: In f!he main, ye8. The first letter in substance spoke of
expediting war as a desirable condition for the coming to power
of the Trotskyites. The second letter elaborated on these so-called
two variants---coming to power in time of peace and coming to
power in the event of war.
The first letter did not deal w'ith the social consequences of the
concessions which Trotsky proposed. If a deal was to be made with
Germany and Japan, then of course it would not be made purely
for the sake of Trotsky's beautiful eyes. But he did not set forth
any program .of concessions in this letter. The second letter spoke
of the social and economic policy, which Trotsky considered an
essential part of such a deal for the coming to power of the
Trotskyites.
°"""
Vyshinskg: What was this policy?
~::-- __ _
Radek: Putting it in the shape of a formula, it was the return fo
capitalism, the restoration 'of capitalism. This was veiled. The
first variant would strengthen the capitalist elements; it meant
handing over considerable economic interests to the Germans anj
Japanese in the form of· concessions and assuming obligations
regarding deliveries of raw materials, foodstuffs and fats to Ger~
many at less than world prices. The internal consequences of this
were clear. The interests of private capital in Russia would con-'
centrate around the German and! Japanese concessionaires: Fur~ •
thermore, this whole policy was connected with a program of re- ;
storing the individual sector, if not in the whole of ag-ricul-hlre,_:_a± l
least in a considerable part of it. But while the first variant in-;~'
volved the. rPstoration of capitalist elements to a considerable-:
degree, the second variant involved indemnities an.d their conse~.:
qucnces, handing over to the Germans, if they demanded it, tho ::C·
factories which would be particularly valuable to their economjii
Since in this same letter he fully realized that this· meant th;,,

and

Do

56

revival of private- trade on an extensive scale the quantitative inter-relation of these factors already presented-a picture of a return to
capitalism, under which only remnants of socialist economy would
be left, and even these would be transformed into elements of
state capitalism.
_
The first letter <lid not contain a social program, the second
did. The first letter was brief-about expediting war; the second_
letter contained an estimate of the international situation. It
discussed tacties in the event of war. While the first letter must
be regarded as a stimulus to defeatist tactics,. the second letter
presented a detailed program, and that is why it differed from
the first letter in length. The first letter consisted of two or three
pages, the secOIIl!d of eight pages of fine English paper, a detailed.
letter.
Vyshitisky: In the-main, what Pyatakov has said coincides with
what you said?
Radek: In the main it-does. I must say that there was no third
letter in which, it is alleged, the conditions orally conveyed to
Pyatakov were put in writing. Pyatakov is mistaken on this point.
After his return, two letters arrived simultaneously, but these referred precisely to wrecking and to the situation in the international working class movement. These letters were in reply to the enquiry_ I ~µt in the autumn of 1934, but ev:idenlly~ while in transit
they were delayed in London and arrived late, in January. I had
no written document confirming the conclu5ion of the preliminary
agreement .with Trotsky or ilc; contents. I heard ahout it from
what Pyatakov said, and since Pyatakov's impressions of the conversation were still fresh, and as I pressed him very hard with
my questions from the point of view of my appraisal of the international situation, I managed to obtain quite a lot from him.
'--; Vgshinsky: You will be able to supplement this when you
'are called to testify. For the moment it was important for me to
hear from you what you could say about Pyatakov's reference to
what you said about the contents of the letter ;received from
·Trotsky.
.
': Radek: In the main I fully confirm it.
· ·. Vyshinsky: The line of defeat, and so forth?
1·
Radek: Yes.
!:
Vyshinsky: Ln this second letter, which has been 'Called a dei~tailed program of defeatism, was there anything about the condi~
1.ifions .which, on coming to pow·er, the group of the parallel centre
~ere to fulfil for the benefit of foreign states?
fl:Y Radek: The whole program was directed towards this.
Vysliinskg: ~rotsky did not outline the conditions themselves?
Radek: He did.

'1;
I

l

'57

Vyshinsky: Did he speak concretely of territorial concessions?
Radek: It was stated that this would probably be necessary.
Vyshinsky: What exactly?
Radek: Territorial concessions would probably be necessary;
Vyshinsky: Of what kind?
.
Radek: If pea<.'.e was to be made with the Germans, we would
have to satjsfy them in one form or another, t.o consent to their
expansion.
Vyshinsky: To hand over the Ukraine?
Radek: When we read the letter we had no doubt of this:
Whatever it would be called, a Helman Ukraine or something else,
it was a question of satisfying German expansion in the Ukraine.
AB regards Japan, Trotsky spo}\e of ceding the Amur region
and the Maritime Province.
·
Vyshinsky: Accused Sokolnikov, <lo you confirm Pyatakov's
testimony as regards the part which concerns the conversation
with the person who was referred to and whose name the President requested not to mention?
·
Sokolnikov: Yes, I do.
Vyshinsky: And do you confirm the contents of this letter?
Sokolnikov: Yes, that's right.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): Tell me, under what circumstances
did you go abroad? What was the officia~ reason for your going
abroad and what took place there unofficially?
Pyatakov: I.have already testified that during my conversation
with Radek at the end of 1935 the question arose that it wa2' necessary to meet Trotsky by one way or another. As I had toot y~ar
to go to Berlin on official business for a fow days, I agreed tna1
I should attempt to see Trotsky, whereupon Radek recommended
me when in Berlin to apply to Bukhartsev, who had connections
with Trotsky, to help me to arrange this meeting. I went to Berlin
and met Buk;hartsev.
Vyshinsky: When was this approximately?
Pyatakov: It was on December 10, in the first half of Decem•
her. That same <lay, or the next, I met Bukhartsev, who, taking
advantage of a moment when nobody was about, told me that he
had heard of my arrival a few days before, had informed Trotsky
of it and was awaiting news from Trotsky on the matter.-The-next
day Trotsky sent a messenger, with whom Bukhartsev brought me
together in the Tiergarten, in one of the lanes, literally for •a couple
of minutes. He showed mf" a brief note from Trotsky which contained a few words: "Y.L., the bearer of this note can be fully
trusted." The word "fully" was un<lerlined, from which I gathere(l
that the person Trotsky had sent was an agent of his.
·
.

f;

58

I do not know the name of this man, I can't say exactly now
what he called himself, either Heinrich, or Gustav, I think it wa~
Gustav, that may have been a nickname, or Heinrich. He. had
received instructions from Lev Davidovich to arrange a- meeting
for me, to go and visit Trotsky, as Trotsky strongly insisted on
having a talk with me.
.
.
As it transpired later this particular insistence was caused ~y
the last letterRadek ha<;! sent to Trotsky.
·
He asked me whether I was prepared to travel by airpl~
I said that I was prepared, although I realized how risky sue~ an
operation was; but since I had had such a conversation with R::tdek
and, generally speaking, the problems confronting us were extremely serious and acute, I thought it was bett~r :to. take th.e
risk of flying and meeting Trotsky than to shirk the risk anq r:~~
main in the state of perplexity we .were in.
.
,
. .
In short, I decided to go, although, I repeat, for me jt rnfant
taking a very great risk of discovery, exposure, and anything 1 you
like: nevertheless, I decided to make the journey.
·
Vyshinsky: Did your conversation with him end there?'. ..
Pyatakov: He arranged to meet me next morning at the. Tempelhof Airport.
Vyshinsky: And is that all?
Pyatakov: That was all at that meeting.
Vyshinsky: Did you tell anyone in Berlin about this meeting?
Pyatakov: Absolutely no one. of course.
Vyshinsky: Did Bukhartsev know?
.
Pyatakov: Bukhartsev was present. This was in Bukhartsev'~
presence. I don't think he heard the whole pf the conversation,
but he brought us together.
·
Vyshinsky: Hence, you were in the Tiergarten with "Bukharbiev?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: A,nd there, while you were with Bukharfsev, you
met this person?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Who arrived first?
Pyatakov: Bukhartsev and I arrived together, and he was
(Waiting for US.
_ Vyshinsky: That conversation did not last long?
;•.,;. Pyatakov: One and a half or two minutes, not more.
~i Vyshinsky: What happened next day?
~;: Pyaf(lkov: Early next morning I went straight to the en~nce of the airdrome. He was waiting at the entrance and led
&f!te-way. He first showed me a passport which ha<l been prepared
ilf:or me. The passport was a German one. He saw to all the

~~

59

.

customs formalities himself, so that all I had to do was to sign

my name.
We got into an airplane and set off. We did not stop any~
where, and at approximately 3 p.m. we landed at the airdrome
in Oslo. There an automobile awaited us. \Ve got in and drove off.
We drove for about 30 minutes and came to a country suburb,
got out, entered a small house that was not badly furnishe~
and there I saw _Trotsky, whom I had not seen since 1928. It
was here that my conversation with Trotsky took place.
· Vyshinsky: Was there anyone present at that conversation?
Pyatdkov: Absolutely nobody, -because the whole thing was
arranged very secretly by both of us, and even the man who had
brought me to the door did not come in. -The conversation was
conducted strictly between ourselves.
Vyshinsky: How long did your conversation last?
Pyatakov: About two hours. Vgshirisky: Tell us what you talked about.
PyatakQv: The conversation b-egan, first of all, iby my giving
some information. I told him what the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
centre had already done. Trotsky had already received Radek's
letter and he was particularly excited. During the conversation he
kept interrupting me, interjected cutting remarks about conciliationism and about not understanding the situation, such as, "you
are living in the old wa,y," and _sirri.il?r biting remarks, and displayed obvious signs of dissatisfaction. When we came to the
subject of wrecking activity, he delivered himself of a veritable
phillipic, made cutting remarks, such as: "You can't break away
from Stalin's navel cord_: you take Stalin's construction
sod~list_
construction."
At the same time: he formulated very sharply, I would say
perhaps _for the first time, so clearly and precisely, his position
with regard to wrecking activities. That is why he made those~
scathing statements. He said that socialism could not be _built in
one country alone, and that the collapse of the Stalin state was
absolutely ineviiable. On the other hand, capitalism was recovering from the crisis, was beginning to grow stronger, and clearly
could not tolerate the growing strength, especially of the war
industry, of the defensive power of the Soviet state very muctr
longer. A military clash was inevitable, and if we remained p-a:ssi-v:e,
all the Trotskyite cadres as well would perish iq the ruins of the
Stalin state. It was for this reason that he considered the wrecking
method not merely one of the sharp forms of struggle, one that,
might be applied or might not, but as something absolutely inevit-~
able _that logically followed from the very essence of llisj
position.
:

·we

for

_')I

M

-I

The question was what attitude the Trotskyite cadres, sho~Jd
adopt: would they tie up their fate with the fate of the Stalin
state, or would they resist and organize themselves for other tasks,
for the overlhrow of the government and pave the way for the
coming to power of ~nother government-a Trotskyite govern·
ment. And here (I give it to you as I got ii) he drew the analogy
whkh I quoted at the preliminary investigation: Look: there was
a time when we Social-Democrats, Struve and Tugan-Baranovsky
all regarded the development of c~pitalisrn as a progressive, as a
positive phenomenon. But there was a difference between_our position and that of Struve and Tugan-Bararn:ff~ky, whose conclusions
were different from oµrs. Struve advacat-;tl serving capitalism. But
we Social-Democrats were different, we had different tasks, name•
ly, to organize the struggle against capitalism, to rear its gravediggers. And so we should now go into ihc service of the Stalin
state, not, however, to help to build the state, but to become its
grave-<lig,gers--therein lies our task. He furth~r said_ that many of
us Trotskyites were still suffering from the illusion that mass
methods, the organization of the 'masses was possible. The, organization of a mass struggile was impossible, in the first place because the worker masses and the peasant masses were in the main
-at present- under the hypnotic influence of the huge constructive
work that was going on in ihe country, constructive work whkh
they took to be socialist construction. Any attempt on our part in
this direction would be quite hopeless, would rapidly lead to complete failure and to the destruction of the comparatively insig. nificant Trotskyite cadres at present in the country. Therefore,
iOmething else was necessary-a coup <l'etat in the fullest sense of
the word, with all its consequences as regards tactics and as
·regards methods of struggle.
- Naturally, having adopted this stand we cannot reJect the methods which_ logically follow, as he.had said before, from. his ap~
praisal of the general situation, from the general policy which
·would. help most effectively to solve this problem, that is to say,
to overthrow the existing government by means of a coup d'etat
and to establish another government. He repeatedly returned to
the subject. I can only give you the.substance of the conversation,
for it is very difficult for me now· to convey it to you verbatim .
. · He repeatedly came back fo the point saying that we were too
, slow, that we did not have, a lot of time at our disposal, that it
was -a matter of a relatively short period, and if we missed this
· opportunity, the danger would arise, on the one hand, af the com: plete liquidation of Trotskyism in the country, and, on the other
;,.hand,fas he put it, of the existence of that monstrosity, the Stalin
~-:state for decades, ,supported by cert_ain economic achievements,

and particularly by the new, young cadres who had grown up
and had bx.,"€n brought up to take this state for granted, to regard
it as a socialist, Soviet state-they did not think of any other
stale and they could not conceive of any. Our task, he said.
was to oppose ourselves to that state. This is Trotsky's philosop~y.
.
Yyshii:zsky: And the practical part?
Pyatakou: One .is very closely connected with the other. In this
connection Trotsky again said that in hiS< opinion war was imminent, that he knew for a fact that it was a question not of, say~
a five-year period, but of a 'short time. He then told me outright
that it wcm1d be in 1937. Apparent11y, he had not invented this information himself. And in this respect these wrecking and diversionist cadres were to be trained, not in any general way, :but in
order to draw a line of demarcation between the Stalin state and
the T.rots'kyite organization, so that we might say, if anything hap~
pened, that we are not the Soviet state. That was one task. The other
task was a more practical one: to train cadres for the event of
war, that is to say, to train diversionists and those who would
engage in destruction, helpers for the fascist attack on the Soviet
Union.
Vyshinsky: That was the practical part?
Pyatakov: Strictly speaking, both parts were practicai, only
the seoond part was more despkable. Then ht; again set forth the
two variants.
Here he ·spoke to me more definitely and more franMy, sinc-E> it
was not a written document but an oral statement; very pt-0bably
he spoke more frankly for this very reason, warning me, however, that he lj,id not think it expedient or possible not only to
make it public, but even to eommunicate it to any considerable
number of Trotskyites; only a very small, restricted group of
people could be informed about this line. And', properly .speaking,
this wa·s comprehensiJble because, as will be evident from wh::1t
I am going to say next, what we were disieussing was downright?
undisguised high treason.
·
Vyshinsky: In what was this expressed?
.
Pyatakou: I'm coming to that now. \Vhoever knows Trotsky;
knows that he always liked to utter some peculiar phrases, to
round up the talk. He said: Do you remember our controversy··
about the possibility m building up socialism in one <country; it
is· quite dear that in this controversy we were in the right, -and
not Stalin. ·
·
·
·
;
As to the internatiomtl situation, he said that the proletarian.
·revolutionary movement was being destroyed and that fascism was
friumphanl If we intend to tome fo 'power, the real forces in the
62

international situation were in the first place the fascists, and with
lhese forces we must establish contact in one way another, in one
form or an-other, we must maintain this contact and ensure that
.the attihlde towards !IS shouild be favourable if we came to power,
whether without a war or, and in particular, in the event of a
war and the defeat of the Soviet Union, which Trolsiky considered
inevitable. He thereupon told me that he was aware of the conversations whioh Radek and Sokoilnikov were conducting. Trotsky
was dissatisfied because they were not active enough, because
they were over-cautious. He told me what- he had specially undertaken.
Vyshinsky: To what conversations are you referring, with
whom?
Pyatakov: I Mn referring to the conversations which Radek
and Sokolnikov conducted with persons representing certain
foreign states, whom Citizen the President has forbidden me fo
nanie.
Vyshinsky: About these conversations?
Pyatakov: Yes. On his part Trotsky said: Of cour~e, you over
there are spending too much time discussing international problems; you would do better to devote yourselves more to those affairs ·or yours that are going badly. He had in mind terrorist,
w:i;-ecking and diversive activities. As for international affairs, he
said, I know more about these things than you and will do more;
Then he told me ... I don't know, I cannot vouch that he told
all that he had d001e, I can only tell you what he told me.
Vyshinsky: He said that you were talking and discussing a
lot instead of engaging in practical -diversive and wrecking
work?
·
Pyatakov: And terrorist ...
Vyshinsky: That is, you again talked specially about engaging
in these activities?
Pyatakov: We did not discuss this s~cially, but the conversation was packed with expressions ill utter dissatisfaction and nasty
and sarcastic remarks to the effect that we had done little in this
direction, that is, in oonnection with practicall wrecking, diversive
and terrorist work. This was said in reply to what I had told him
about what was going on over here.
Vgshinsky: In saying that you had done little, what else did
he talk about?
Pyatakov: In connection wih..h the iinternational question Trotsky very emphatically insisted on the necessity of preparing diversionist cadres. He rebclled us for not engaging energet!cally
enough in diiversive, wreckin,g and terrorist activities.
He told me that he had come to an absolutely definite agree·

gs

ment with the fascist German government and with the Japanese
government that they would adopt a favourable attitude in the
event of the Trotskyile-Zinovievite bloc coming to power. But, he
added, it went without saying that such a favourable attitude was
not due to any particular love these governments cherished for
the Trotskyitc-Zinovievite bloc. It simply proceeded from the
real interests of the fascist governments and from what we had
promised to do for them if we came to power.
Vyshinsky: What did you promise?
Pyatakov: Here I must first make one explanation.. Trotsky
again said that from this standpoint, too, from the standpoint of
the negotiations he was conducting ~md of what he had already
achieved, it was extremely important to build up an active, concrete and real force. He then told me that he had conducted rather
lengthy negotiations with the Vice-Chairman of the German Nationa:l-Socialist Party-Hess. It is true I cannot say whether there
is an agreement signed hy him, or whether there is only an understanding, but Trotsky put it to me as though an .agreement existed,
one which it is true still had to be givea definite shape by certain
other persons, of whom I shall speak in camera.
\Vhat, properly speaking, <loes this agreement amount to if formulated briefly? First, the German fascists- promise to adopt a
favourable attitude towards the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc and
to support it if it comes to power, either in time of war, or before
a war, should it succeed in doing so. But in return the fascists are
to receive the following compensation: .a general favourable attitude towards German interests and towards the German government on all questions of international policy; certain -terr..it.Qrial
concessions would have to be made, and these territorial concessions have been defined-in particular, mention was made of territorial concessions in a veiled form which were called "not resisting Ukrainian national-bourgeois forces in the event of their ~elfdctermination."
·
"
Vyshinsky: ·what does that mean?
Pyatakov: It means in a veiled form what Radek spoke albout
here: should the Germans set up their Ukrainian government,
ruling the Ukraine not through their German Governor-General
but perhaps through a hetrnan-at any. rate, should the Germans "self-determine" the Ukraine--the Trotskyite-Zinovie'.\:it~
bloc will not oppose it. Actually, this meant the beginning of the
dismemberment of the Soviet Union.
.
The next point of the agreement dealt with the form in which
German capital would he_ enabled to exploit in the Soviet Union
the raw material resources it needs. It concerned the exploitation
of g9ld mines, oil, manganese, forests, apatites, etc.
_ (}4

In short, it was agreed in principle between Trotsky and Hess
that German capital would be allowed to come in and obtain a
necessary economic complement but- ~he definite forms w11ich this
was to assume would evidently be worked out later.
The last point I remember_ was concessions~ I think that
was so.
Vyshinsky: And what about diversive acts in case of war?
Pyatakov: That was the last point. That I remember very well.
And lastly, the hardest point-which, generally speaking, reveals
our face without any camouflage or adornment whatever-was
also formulated in this agreement between Trotsky and Hess.
True, I would not undertake to assert now that it was part of the
conception of the agreement between Hess and Trotsky I -spoke
about before; this was a speciail, separate agreement. But it d1d
enter into the general conception of the agreement, which means
that. since Hess and Trotsky had discussed the question of war and
a military coup d'etat, accession to power, that is to say, the defeat of the U.S.S.R.-Hess, of course, quite natumliy raised the
point: \Vell, you are fighting over there; while in- this case we are
a much better organized and a better armed force. It is clear once
we negotiate you must go the whole length. In thi! event orf military attack the destructive rforces of the Trotskyite organizations
wh,ich would act within the country must be co-ordinated with
the forces from without acting under the guidance of German
fascism. The diversive and wrecking activity which is being conducted by the Trotskyite-Zinovievite organization within the Soviet
Gnion must be carried out under the instructions of Trotsky, which
are to be agreed upon with the German General Staff.
Towards the end there was talk to the effect that, say, the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc comes into power with the aid of certain external forces, they put us into power. What about these
concessions that we outlined in addition to a number of others
that we also had in mind, and also the need for a certain pacification of the forces which we would mobilize for the fight against
Stalin, that is to say, hostile forces? What I mean is the hostile
sections, the kulaks. In this connection also it would be necessary,
for considerations of home policy, to effect a fairly big retreat, in
addition to. concessions to foreigners. Radek quite justly mentioned this retreat in town and country, such as permitting capitalist trade and so forth. To put it simply, Trotsky explained
that it would be a very serious retreat. This is exactly what he
said: you and Radek are still under the sway of the dld ideas of
1925-26 and you are unable to see that in essence our coming to
power wi:ll mean that we will have to retreat very far in the direction of capitalism. In this conection Trotsky said that in essence our
65

program was the same as that of the Rights in so far as the Rights
_had adopted a diversive wrecking program and considered that
it was necessary to retreat towards capitalism. Trotsky expressed
very great satisfaction when I told him about Sokolnikov's conver-sation with Tom.sky and my conversation with Tomsky, and also
about the contacts Radek and I had with Bukharin. He said that
this was not only a tactical measure, that is to say, unity in the
struggle against one and the same enemy, but that this unity had
some significance in principle.
Vyshinsky: And so, what was there new in what Trotsky saiO. in
1935, oomparod with what you were to-Id befQre, and what you
had been guided by in your criminal activities?
·
Pyatakov: Whait was new, if you like, was formulated <listinctly enough: in essence, the Trotskyite organization was being transformed into an appendage of fascism.
Vyshinsky: Did you learn that only at that time?
Pyatakov: To me it became clear only then.
Vyshinsky: But it was dear to you that all that you were doing
was a grave crime against the state?
Pyatakov: During that conversation it was not clear to me.
Vyshinsky: In 1931, when you received the line on terrorwas that a grave crime against the S'fate?
Pyatakov: Yes, of course.
Vyshinsky: In 1932 this line was confirmed and you undertook
to carry out this task. \Vas that a grave crime againsit the state?
Pyatakov: It also was.
Vysh'insky: That is to say?
~.;:_
Pyatakov: Also a grave crime against the state, that .is~clear.
Vyshinsky: You were given a line, through Radek or :directly,
on wrecking?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You accepted?
if
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How· do you de.scribe that?
Pyatakov: In the same way.
Vyshinsky: That is to say?
Pyatakov: As a grave crime against the state.
Vyshinsky: You received a line on diversive activi_ti~s?
Pyatakov: Yes.
-- - - . ~-~Vyshinsky: How do you describe that?
Pyatakov: In the same.way.
Vyshinsky: You were given a line on defeatism?
fl;yatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How do you describe that?
Pyata_kov: In the same way.
66

Vyshinsky: You were given a line on espionage? How do you
describe that?
Pyatakov: In the 5ame way.
Vyshinsky: For whose benefit?
Pyatpkov: H~re I do not say for whose benefit.
Vyshinsky: On whose behalf, for what political aims? Was
that clear when you, in 1931, accepted the line on wrecking, wh~m
you ·accepted the line on diversive activities, when you accepted
the line on espionage, on connections with the intelligence
services of certain foreign stat-es? Or was it not clear to you whither
that led? How do you describe that?
·
Pyatakov: If this had all been clear then, probably everything would have been a little different.
Vyshinsky: After all, you are a grown man. Let us retrace
our steps. In accepting the line on terrorism, did you not understand that this meant killing th-e leaders of our Party?
Pyatakov: Of course, I understood.
Vyshinsky: And is this not a grave crime against the state?
Pyatakov: Of course, it is clear.
Vyshinsky: Why, then, did you say that it was not c!ear to
vou?
~ Pyatakov: Not that side.
Vyshinsky: But that side interests me as the representative o'f
the State prosecution. Why do you say it was not dear? ·what is
there unclear: go to the U.S.S.R., organize terrorist groups here,
organize the murder of the leaders of the Party and the government. Is that clear or unclear?
Pyatak011: Clear, of course.
Vyshinsky: What then is not clear to you?
Pyatakov: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: In my opinion it is clear, and it is clear to the
whole people and probably it is clear to you.
Pyatakov: But I told you it became clear.
Vyshinsky: That is what I am asking you: \Vas that clear to
you?
Pyatakov: Clear, of course.
Vyshinslcy: Expediting war-was that the line?
Pyatakov: (Remains silent.)
Vgshinsky: Helping the aggressor-was that the line?
Pgatakov: It was.
·
Yysliinsky: Helping the aggressor means helping fascism?
Pgatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Helpers of fascism are an appendage of fascism?
Pyatakov: Not always.
/'
:;_: Vyshinsky: But in the present case?
67

Pgatakov: In the present case, undoubtedly.
Vyshinsky: So it is clear? I have no more questions.
The President: \Y.hat aim did you pursue in August 1936
when you wrote your letter about the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
centre, the letter that was published in our press in Moscow?
\Vhat was then clear to you, and what was unclear at the time
of \vriting that letter?
.
Pyatakov: At that time, generally speaking, I was seeking a
way out of the situation that had arisen, and I thought, falsely
thought, w.rong;ly thO'l:lght, that I •could crawl out, or get out of
this counter-revolutionary fascist morass some way other than
the only way a person in such a situation has, that is to say, by
fully giving away the organization, the deeds that it was perpetrating, and exposing oneself. I could not make up my mind to do
that, and went another way.
The President: Which way?
Pyatakov: I wrote that article then. I th-O'Ught it would help
me to break off and withdraw somehow. But that was wrong.
The President: How is that to be understood? What does
"help" to get away mean? Did you want to cover up your actions?
Pyatakov: I have already said that it was wrong.
The President: You wanted to show by your letter that you
had ·nothing in common with the Trotskyites?
Pyatakov: No, I wanted something else. What I achieved is
another matter.
Vyshinsky: On your return from Berlin did you talk with anybody about the meeting with Trotsky?
"',,.
Pyatakov: I had meetings with Radek and Sokolniko.-V. ~­
Vyshinsky: Did you tell them about this conversation w1th
Trotsky?
Pyatakov: I did.
Vyshinsky: Approximately in the way you related it today?
Pyatakov: Probably in greater detail, since at that time I wast
under the immediate impression of that conversation.
Vyshinsky: But in the main, as you related it here?
Pyatakov: \Vhy, of course.
Vyshinsky: How did Radek react to it?
Pyatakov: These last formulations, the dotting of the i's that
was done during that conversation caused an unpleasanLreactiQI!_.
both in Radek and in me, and we thought of doing something:
but we did not reject it, and continued to carry on with
what we were doing. But on the other hand, we th<mght to ourselves that we four, Serebryakov, Sokolnikov, Raidek and I, could
not, generally speaking, take responsibility for all this business,
that in this connection we ought to convene a conference of the
68

centre. which we hard not convened, to discuss what shou~d be done
further, because, as far as I understood Radek-it is true I did not
speak to him in any particular detail, but so I understood himthat he, too, had the feeling that we had gat into a blind alley, and
I felt that too, and we thought that we ought to speak with the
centre and with some of the close comrades in the provinces in
order to define ourselves somehow. Mvreover, there was a
vague idJea that these conferences might have as a result that the
attitude here would be apposed, at all events, on these acute questions. I must say that both he and I, to a certain extent, pursued
an ostrich-like poli-cy-iwe hid our heads in the sand, but did nothing of !mportance.
Vyshinsky: Did that last meeting you had with Trotsky change
anything in your criminal activities?
Pgatakov: It changed nothing.
Vyshinsky: And in the criminal activities of Radek and Sokolnikov'?
Pyatakov: Nothing.
Vyshinsky: The instructions which Trotsky gave you in December 1935, did you accept them as his wishes, or as a directive?
Pyatakov: In so far as, in general, the main directive which the
parallel centre followed was what came from Trotsky, of cour.se
it was a directive.
Vyshinsky: The conversation you had with Trotsky .in December 1935 and the line he gave, did you accept it as a directive
or simply as something said in a conversation, but not binding
for you?
_
Pyatakov: Of course as a directive.
Vyshinsky: Hence, we can take it that you subscribed to it?
Pyatakov: We can take it that I carried it 0'1.lt.
Vyshinsky: And carried it out.
Pgatakov: Not "and carried it out," but "carried it out."
Vyshinsky: There is no difference in that whatever.
Pyatakov: There is a difference for me.
Vyshinsky: What is it?
Pyatakov: As far as action is concerned, particularly criminally liable action, there is no difference whatever.
Vyshinsky: After your conference with Trotsky you continued
your criminal activities in the same way as before?
_
Pyatakov: Undoubtedly.
Vyshinsky: In accordance with the directions given before and
after? To this question do you answer in the affirmative or the
negative?
Pyatakov: In the affirmative.
Vyshinsky: Did Radek act in the same way?
61)

Pyalakov: Probably; I did not meet him after January 1936.
Vyshinsky: You, however, continued in the old way?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vysliinsky: Now I want to ask you about your criminal activities in the sphere of the organization of terrorist acts. Concretely,
what was that expressed in?
Pyatakov: First of all it was the o·rganization of the terrorist
groups in Western Siberia through the West-Siberian centre.
Vyshinsky: For what purpose were they organized in Western
Si~ria?
.
Pyatakov: In \Vestern Siberia there was an attempt to kill
'Molotov.
Vyshimky: Further?
Pyatakov: In the Ukraine, rto kill Kossior and Postyshev. In
the Ukraine there was talk with the Ukrainian Trotskyites to the
effect that if it were necessary to transfer Trotskyite terrorist
cadres to Moscow that would have to be done.
Vyshinsky: \Vith whom was this talk?
Pyatakov: \Vith Loginov.
Vyshinsky: \Vhiieh cadres?
Pyatakov: No definite persons were mentioned.
Vyshinsky: Whom was that left to?
Pyaiakou: That was left to them.
Vyshinsky: To trans.fer to 1\foscow, for what purpose?
Pyatakov: For lhe purpose of committing terrorist acts.
Vyshinsky: Against whom?
Puatakov: It was not stated specifically.
Vyshinsky: Who was included in your plan?
~--Pyatakov: The Moscow leaders.
Vyshinsky: Against whom?
Pyatakov: Against the leaders of the Party and the government: Stalin, :Molotov, Kaganovich, Voroshilov, Orjonikidze. It
was a question of committing a number of terrorist acts more"
or less simultaneously. Trotsky insisted upon this particularly
strongly.
·
Vyshinsky: These were the leaders of our Party and the government whom you had in mind?
Pyatakov: Of course.
Vyshinsky: So in your plan you arranged to ibring in--terrorists.
from the Ukraine?
Pyatakov: Yes, if that were needed.
Vyshins-ky: For what purpose would it be necessary to bring
ih terrorists from the Ukraine?
.
Pyatakov: For the following purpose: we discussed among ourselves. . • .
·
70

Vyshinsky: Who are "we"?
Pyatakov: Sokolnikov, I, Radek and Serebryakov, and later it
was discussed with Tomsky.
Vyshinsky: What discussions, what did you discuss?
Pyatakov: We discussed the question of carrying out Trotsky's
directives to the effect that not scattered blows, but a concentrated terrorist blow was needed.
Vyshinsky: What does a concentrated terrorist blow mean?
Pyatakov: It means, as I have stated already, committing terrorist acts against a number of the leaders of the Party and the
government more or less simultaneously. For this purpose it
would obviously be necessary to bring in terrorists from outside:,
from the Ukraine and other places. .
Vgshinsky: There was also taiJ.k about Transcaucasia?
Pyatakov: Yes, there was also talk about the Transcaucasian
terrorists.
Vyshinsky: About th.is too you talked to the leaders of these
groups?
·
Pyatakov: Not the groups, but \vith the leaders of the centres.
At that time we spoke to Loginov from the Ukraine, and to the
Transcaucasian leaders.
Vyshinsky: Who from Trancaueasia did you speak to?
P,yatakov: To Mdivani; Serebryakov spoke to Mdivani about
sending Transcaucasian Trotskyite terrorists to Moscow if it were
necessary.
Vyshinsky: Commde President, permit me to question the
accused Serebryakov.
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky: Accused Serebryakov, do you confirm Pyatakov's
evidence concerning your conversation with Mdivani?
Serebryakov: Yes, this had in view a terrorist act against
Yezhov.
Vyshinsky: Especially against Comrade Yezhov?
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And H was about this particular case that you
spoke to Mdivani?
Serebryakov: Exactly.
Vyshinsky: iDid you mention·Comrade Yezhov's name to him?
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vgshinsky (fo Pyata'kov): Hence,. we have already counted
a nUilliber of terrorist acts which were being prepared with your
participation.
· ·
Pyatdkov: Quite true.
Vyshinsky: Who operated under your ·immediate direction in
Moscow?
·

Pgatakov: In Moscow, operating under my immediate direction was the group of Yulin, which included Oskoldsky, Dokuchayev, Koloskov.
Vyshinskg: What object did it pursue?
Pyotakov: The assassination of Stalin and Kaganovich;
Vyshinskg: And you were in immediate charge of this?
Pgatakov: Yes, immediate, as a member of the centre. Further
I knew of the existence of terrorist groups connected with Sokolnikov and Radek. One was the group of Zaks-Gladnyev and Tivel,
which was connected with Sokolnikov, and the other was the
Pr.igozhin group, which was connected with Rad.ek. Moreover,
all the time we intended to call Dreitzer here as we knew that he
had! terrorist connections.
Vgshinsky: Did you ta:lk about Dreitzer to anybody?
Pgatakov: I tallmd to Radek.
Vyshinsky: Comrade President, permit me to question the
accused Radek.
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky: Accused Radek, tell me, did you have a talk
about Dreitzer?
Radek: There was a talk in July 1935.
\Vhen we first gathered together after the murder of Kirov
there arose the question that it was senseless killing single individuals. This would produce no political results but would only
lead to the <lestru-ction -of the organization. It was therefore necessary to ascertain precisely whether forces were available for
serious action or whether there were no such forces.
'°'"
Vyshinsky: Do I understand you rightly: it was not enQJ,!gh
to have killed Comrade Kirov, others must be killed also?
- Radek: Either abandon terrorism altogether, or start seriously
o~ganizing mass terrorist acts w'hich wou1'd give rise to a situation
bringing us nearer to power.
Vyshinsky: Hence, it is as I say: it was not enough to limitf
it to one murd.er but, either murder a number of leaders, or give
it up entirely?
Radek: It is not a question of number, because if three were'
to be killed one after the other in the course O<f seven years nothing
w-ould come of it; the question stood as follows: if terrorist a'ct~,
wer-e lo serve a.s a means to seizing power, then the question_Q!!_<L_
to be seriously raised of destroying the leadership of the government. ·
Vyshinsky: As a whole?
Radek: Yes.
. ~·~
.Vyshinsky: And what did you decide?
Radek: We decided that such a question could be settled o;j
- 72

the basis of a knowledge of the available forces, or on the basis of
the prospect of organizing the new forces· we needed, and we
decided to can Ephim Dreitzer, who, as we knew, had large CO'll•
.nectlons and in the past had many groups of which we were not
aware before. Our idea was that our decision would depend on the
picture which we would get from Dreitzer (concerning the Trotskyite organization and concernii1g connections between the Trotsky.ite
terrorist organization and the Rights).
Vyshinsku: Here there is a discrepancy between you and
Pyatakov. Pyatakov states the following: an agreement was arrived at with Loginov, an agreement was arrived at with M9-ivani,
to collect forces and _to carry out your criminal designs. Did I
understand you correctly, accused Pyatakov?
Pgutakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: But according to Raidek, you were still ascertaining
what forces were available in order t-0 decide whether to act in
this wav or to abandon it.
Pyatakov: It refers to what I was saying ailJcmt preparing the
terrorist groups. Serebryakov dealt 1n this matter with Mdivani,
and I with the Ukrainians and Siberians; and here I became convinced, and we agreed with Ra<dek, that the situation being what
it was, the forces were still inadequate. . . .
Vyshinsky: This was a conversation with Radek concerning
preparation for this terrorist act against a whole group?
Pyatakov: Yes.
I must say that all this was done in the course of carrying out
the main dii.rective of Trotsky, '\\'lho demanded the execution of
a group terrorist act. Whether this was to take place all on one
day, or within a short period of time, was another matter. Trotsky
-did not raise this question.
) Vyshinsky: H was no longer considered necessary to decide
whether to organize this terrorist act or not? That question was
regarded as settled?
Pyatakov: Depending on the posisibilities availaible for it.
Vyshinsky: You regarded this question as settled, and it was
only a matter of ascertaining the technical possibilities?
Pyatakov: Not orily technical.
·
Vyshinsky: Or did you have to discuss the question in itself?
Pyatakov: The question· was whether ·the terrorist cadres
available could do it or not.
~ ·· Depending on the possibHities at hand, that is how Radek also
tput the question. Of course, we had no need to discuss the quesrtion in itself. The point .was that the terrorist acts that were
planned were to be carried/out depending on the cadres available,
n'h.e question V.ras considered depending on this. I rem~mber very

73

well; this was in 1934-35, Serebryakov had a talk with Mdivani.
TI1e.re was a reproa-ch made that co'1nter-revoluitionary work was
not being developed with sufficient er.gy. He said that the murder of Beria should be approved. I, from a more criminal point
of view, said that such isolated actions would be senseless.
. Vysh.insky: You said that there must be more serious prepara~
tion?
Pyatakov: Of .course.
· Vyshinsky: My question concerns the essentials: what w~ the
obj~ct of your negotiations with the Ukrainian terrorist group,
the 'Transcaucasian, and the others?
Pyatakov: The object was to commi1 terrorist acts. We set
this task to the terrorist regional centres, and among ourselves, we
cOTuSidered the question of when and how it was to be decided.
Vysliinsky: Now I want to question the accused Radek on this
matter.
Radek: Pyatakov is mixing up all the dates.
Vyshinsky: There is a discrepancy ibetween what you two say?
Radek: There is a disagreement between what is recorded in
the investigation material.
· Vyshinsky: The facts in the investigation material were received
from you.
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Our investigation material is, also your material.
Radek: I assert that not one of us is refuting the investigation
material. It was testified that Trotsky's directive concerning a
group h~rrorist act arrived in January 1936.
.::""
Vyshinsky: Trotsky's directives concerning terrorist acts;:i;r-0up
acts, were received by you?
Radek: They were.
Vyshinsky: Is that a fact?
Radek: Yes, it is a fad.
1
Vyshinsky: There is no dispute about that?
Radek: No ..
Vyshinsky: Before that directive, were preparations for terrorist acts being made in our country?
Radek: Before we received Trotsky's directives we took our
own bearings. In July 1935 the question was raised of it be1ng
necessary to ascertain the availalble f orees, whether-· they wet"e
sufficient to proceed in this direction or not. At that time :Dreit:zer
was not h€'re, and we were in a quandary. We were faced with
a problem in the sense that without Dieitzer we could not solve it.
Vyshinsky: I w01Uld like to clear uµ the queS>tion from the
point of view of the <lisagreemerits on the first question,
·
Radek: I do not know when Pyatalwv talked to Loginov and
.74

Mdh-ani., and the_ others. l understand that it was at the time we
su.mmone<i Dreitzer.
7
\ yshinsky: I want to say -this: Do you deny, accused Radek,
:that Loginov was making preparations in the Ukraine for terrorist acts aJgainst the Party leaders, Comrades Koss.ior, Postyshev?
Radek: I do not deny it because I know that Loginov was
engaged in preparing terrorist acts against the leaders of the Party.
Vyshinsky: You knew about this?
·
.Radek: I learned about it in January 1935.
.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, two years ago you knew that
Loginov was engaged in preparing terrorist aets against 1lhe leaders
of the Party and the government?
Radek: For a long period of time.
Vyshinsky: You knew that in Moscow there were .groups
engaged in preparing terrorist acts?
Radek: One group was under my direction.
Vyshinsky: A group was under your direction?
Rddek: In Mo.scow there was._one group whkh was subordin·
ated lo me personally.
Vyshinsky: What was it engaged in?
Radek: This group, subordinated to me persomdly, was engaged
in preparing cadres for the event Olf an or<ler arriving, to commiit
a terrorist act.
-Vyshinsky: Hence, this was a terrorist group? Do you know.
that Mdivani was preparing cadres and had set himself the task
of committing terrorist acts?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What is the differenee?
Radek: The difference revealed itself later. You see, the existen~ of such groups, the creation of such groups for terrorist acts against a whole group of people---! think it is not in the
· interest of the state prosecution to develop here how these acts
are committed, and it does not eorrespond to the views with which
I am speaking in this Court.
Vyshinsky: These views interest me less than the views· you
held then.
Radek: But you do not wal!lt 1:o hear.
Vyshinsky: In 1931 there was isolated preparation of single
terrorist groups?
·
· Radek: Work was carried on in so far as preparing cadres
·was coneerned and in so far as the objects were already decided
Oil; although, it is true, without dates ..
"
VysHinsky: What were these abjects? You say that the objects
'.tof the terrorist acts were decidedi on. What does that mean from
~your professional criminal point of view? That there were marked

75

out certain leaders of the Party and the government against whom
terrorist acts were being prepared?
Radek: From the moment the bloc was formed the cirde of
persons against whom it wa:.s intended to carry out terrorist acts
was known.
Vyshinsky: And this is what you are talkirrg about?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Further, I ask you: group preparation-is this a
new stage?
Ra_'dek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: ·what was the disagreement aboot then?
Radek: The disagreement was that we discussed this new
stage, but did not yet decide, not knowing what the line was to be.
Pyatakov: That is what I say, we called Dreitzer for the purpose of as-certaining the possib-ility of carrying it out.
Vyshinsky: Anid toldecidewhetlher it was possible to commit terrorist acts .against groups or .whether to stand on the old position?
Radek: We regarded the old position as a stage that had been
passed. If it was impossible to go forward, then it were better
not to put forward the possibility at all.
Vyshinsky: WheTe was fuis discussed? Where was this question raised?
Radek: Pyatakov and I discussed whether we could carry out
what, from the point of view of the obiects we had set ourselves,
was reasonable, or whether we could not? .
Vyshinsky: Hence, in January 1936, the question of expediency
already arose among you?
k
Radek: This was mot in- January 1936, all this ·refers_ t()
January 1935.
.
Vyshinsky: And so this question arose and you settled it?
Radek: \Ve did not settle it. \Ve did not settle it because we
had no grounds upori which to settle it; we had no contact with
Dreitzer, he had not shown up for six months, and he was th~
leader of the terrorist organization.
Vyshinsky: So it depended on Dreitzer?
Radek: It depended on the existence of facts which would
enable us to ad1opt a decision.
Vyshim:ky: Hence, had there ibeen eadres you would have
adopted one decision; had there been no cadres, owing-to-technical
conditions, you would have adopted another decision?
Radek: Correct. Vle did not aibandon the position of terrorism.
Vyshinsky: Thus you did not abandon the position of terrorism,
ln principle you were in favour of terrorism?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: But you did not know whether, in the given con~
76

crete conditions, you would succeed in carrying out mass terror?
Radek: We tried to ascertain what already existed:, and.on the
other hand, we tried to collect new cadres.
Vyshinsky: Can this be qualified as preparing to organize group
terror?
Radek: Preparations were going on all the time; in 1935 t!hese
preparations entered the stage of preparing for a group terrorist
act, as a new, expanded tactic.
Vyshinsky: You call it a "new expanded tactic," but in ihe
language of the 'Criminal Code, it is caned murder,. covered by
Article 588 •
·
Now then, did you, in the course of 1935 and the beginning of
1936, prepare for a group terrorist act or not?
Radek: I do not know the Criminal Code, so I cannot speak in
the language o<f the code.
·
Vyshinsky: I think you will know it after the trial.
Radek: I don't think I will know much about it afler the trial.
Vyshinsky: That will depend upon the verdict of the Court. At
all events, you will know more about it than you know now.
Radek: In the seoond half of 1935 the first steps were taken
to a.scertain the possibilities for this act. In 1936, after instructions
had been received from Trotsky, and after Pyatakov's arrival from
Berlin, I had no more dealings with regard to this matter.
Vy~hinsky: You are istill avoiding a direct answer to the question. I shall permit myself to repeat. my question and ask you to
give a straight answer: in the second half of 1935 up to Pyatakov1s
return from Berlin in 1936, were preparatioll6 being made in your
midst for a .group terrorist act?
Radek: Yes, there were.
l'yshinsky: You confirm this?
·<
Raqek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions. I ask that the witness
Bukhartsev be called to give evidence.
The President (to the Commandant): Pl ease ask witness Bukhartsev to come in.
(Witness Bukhartsev enters the Court.)
The President (to Bukhartsev): You are Bukhartsev, Dmitri
Pavlovich?
·
Bukhartsev: Yes.
'[he President: Your last position and ocoopaition?
Bukhartsev: Izvestia correspondent in Berlin.
·,-_The President: You have been -called as a witness in the case of
;Pyatakov, Radek and others. You must pledge yourself to give
f ~e evidence.
1

Ki

11

Comrade Vyshinsky, since the witness Bukhartsev has been
called at your request, please put your questions.
Vysllinsky: \Vitness Bukhartoev, do you know Radek?
Bukhartsev: Yes, I do
Vyshinsky: A long time?
Bukhartsev: I know him approximately since 1924.
Vyshinsky: Do you also know Pyatakov?
Bukhartsev: I ·made Pyatakov's acquaintance in 1935 .
. Vyshinsky: Who introduced you to Pyatakov?
Bukhartsev: I made Pyatakov's acquaintance under the following circumstances. When he was in Berlin I went up to him and
introduced myself~ He alr~aidy kney; about me.
Vyshinsky: Did you have occasion to enter into relations with
Pyatakov in connection with Trotskyite underground work?
- Bukhartsev: At the beginning of December 1935, I learned that
Pyatakov was coming to Berlin. A few <lays 'later a -certain Gustav
Stimer rang me up on the telephone. I had been put in touch with
him some time earlier by Radek.
Vyshinslry: Why did he telephone?·
Bukhartsev: He telephoned me and we met. He was Trotsky's
man.
Vyshinskg: How do you know that?
Bukhartsev: I know it because when -I left Moscow in May
1934, Radek told me that when I arrived in Berlin I would receive
a letter in which it would n€ stated that a journalist who arrived!
from Vienna was to convey to me greetings from Karl-that would
be Trotskv's man.
Vyshi~sky: What does Trotsky's man mean?
Bukhartsev: It means a man to whom I could pass on anything
Radek entrusted me with for Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: Further, con{'.erning Pyatakov?
Bukhartsev: \Vhen Gustav Stimer telepbtined me I told him that
Pyatakov was expected to arrive within a few days. He said that
this was very interesting. that he would try and inform Trotsky
of this, and that probably Trotsky would want to see him. A few
days later he telephoned again and when Imet him he said that
Trotsky wanted to see Pyatakov without fail, that he, Stimer, had
a letter, or a note, for Pyatakov, and that ·as soon as Pyatakov
arrived he must meet him without fail.
\Vhen Pyatakov arrived I went to see him and, choosing a
moment when 'he was alone in his room, told him that there was a
-man from Trotsky who wanted to han<l him a letter and who would!
arrange for him to meet Trotsky. Pyatakov said that he was very
pleased to hear this, that it fully {'.Oincided with his intentions;
and that he would willinisly a.gree to this meeting.
78

I saw Stirn.er and made the arrangements with him, told him
that Pyatakov was willing to maike the trip, and a meeting with
Stirnei: took place in the Siegesallee, in the Tiergarten.
Vyshinsky: Were you present during the conversation?
Bukhartsev: Yes, I. was present. After that I went away and a
few days later, probably before Pyatakov's departure from Berlin
for l\foscow, I met Pyatakov in the Soviet Embassy in Berlin and
asked him whether his journey had been successful. He said that
he ·had been and seen.
Vyshinsky: Permit me to ask Pyatakov: iDid you give your
photograph?
Pyatakov: I did.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): Did you have a conversation with
Bukharlsev on your return from OISlo~
Pgatakov: Strictly speaking, there was no conversation; I only
said that I had been and seen.
Vyshinsky: A question to Bukhartsev: Do you know where Stirner obtained the passport, where-he .obtained the airplane? How
is it so easy to do this in Germany?
Bukhartsev: Wlhen I talked to Stirner I asked him how he would
obtain .a passport. Stirner said: "Don't worry, I will arrange the
matter. I have connections in Berlin."
Vyshinsky: What connections?
Bakhartsev: He did not tell me. I imagined! they were connections in circles which could do these things.
Vgshinsky: Which circles?
Bukhartsev: German government officials.
Vyshinsky: Did Stirner hint that to you?
Bukhartsev: No, he did not say anything; he said: "I have .sufficient connections."
Vyshinsky: And were you not curious about this?
7
Bukhartsev: He did not tell me anything, did not go into details.
Vyshinsky: But were you curious about this?
Bukhartsev: Since he did not reply. . . •.
Yyshinsky. But did you try to ask him?
Bukhartsev: I did, but he did not reply:.
Vyshinsky: And the airplane?
Bukhartsev: I aisked him how Pyatakov could travel and he
·· S;ltid that a special airplane· would take Pyatakov to Oslo and
,back.
~;
Vyshinsky: A special airplane. And you dii<l not ask what special
~lane it was?
.
·
Bukh.artsev: I. asked, but he. gave me an evasive answer.
Vyshmsky: Did you meet Stimer afterwards?

l

: · Bukhartsev: NI).
i.'

79

Vyshinsky: He vanished without a trace as far as you were
concerned?
BukhartseP: He did not live in Berlin.
Vyshinsky: Where did he live?
Bukhartsev: The address he .gave me was Oslo, General Post
Office, poste restante.
Vyshinskg: Did you have no oceasion to write to this address?
Bukhartsev: No.
Vyshinsky: Hence, he was someboidy's man too?
Bukhartsev: He was Trotsky's man ..
Vyshinsky: But it was not Trotsiky who arranged! for the flight
across the frontier?
.
Bukhartsev:·That I do not know.
Vyshinsky: You are an experienced journalist; you know that
a flight ac.ross a frontier from one country to ·another is not a
simple matter?
Bukhartsev: I understood that Stimer was able to do this
through German official persons.
The object was a visit to Trotsky. They did not do it for the
sake of Stirner's beautiful eyes.
Vyshinsky: Could they not dispense with you in this matter?
Why did you take part in thi~ operation?
Bukhartsev: I took part in this operation because some time
before that, Radek, who had drawn me into the organization, told
me that I must carry out ·every commis-sion o>f this nature .that he
would assign to me. Aud he then also informed me that Pyatakov
was a member of the centre.
.
Vyshinsky: So you knew that Pyatakov was a memfier o.,fJhe
~~?
:
Bukhartsev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Hence, you were informed about the criminal activities of the centre?
Bukhartsev: Yes.
Vys!Iinsky: You knew about this?_
Bukhartsev: Yes. I was a member of the Trotsikyite organization.
.
Vyshinsky: And at the saine time you were the special corre~
spondent of Izvestia?
Bukhartsev: Yes, I was the special correspondent oLlzves.ti_q._
Vyshinsky: Permit me to question Radek.
·
The President: If you please.
Vyshinsky: Accused Radek, here Bukhartsev testifies that you
drew him into this business?
Radek: Yes, it is· true.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions.
80

The President: Have the accused any questions to put to Bukhartsev? Accu.sed Pyatakov, have you any questions to put tu
Bukhartsev?
Pyatakov: No.
The President: Accused Radek, 'have you any questions lo put
to Bukhartsev?
R·adek: No.
The President: Have counsel for defence :my questions lo put
to Bukhartsev?
Counsel for Defence: ('Reply in the negative.)
The President: According to the rules of procedure we still
ha.Ye 15 minutes. Rais the Procurator any questions to put to the

accused Pyatakov?
Vyshinsky: Permit me to revert to the examination of Pyatakov
during the subsequent stages of the trial if necessary. And· for
today, I think the session might be adjourned at this point. ·
The President: The Court adljourns until 11 a. m. tomo.rrow.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist

President of the Military Collegium_ of
tlie Supreme Co11rt of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

81

A. KOSTYUSHKO
l\lilitary Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, JANUARY 24, 1937, 11:00 A.M.

Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
Tlze President: The session is resumed. We shall proceed to the
examination of the accused Ra<lek.
Accused Radek, do you confirm the testimony you gave during
the preliminary investigation in December?
Radek: I confirm it.
Vyshinsky: Tell us briefly of your past Trotskyite activities.
Radek: During the Party struggle in 1923 I joined the T.rotskyite
opposition and belonged to it and to its leadership until the time
of my exile in January 1928. While I was in exile I continued to adhere to the Trotskyite position until the time I made the declaration
to the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. in July 1929. All this time
I belonged to the political centre of the Trotskyite organization.
Vyshinsky: What dictated your declaration?
Radek: My declaration was dictated, firstly, by the conviction
I had come to at that time. I thought over, while in exile, the
whole past and the falsity of Trotsky's general position. As regards the fundamental pdnciples o.f Trotskyism, abo-gJ the im·
possibility of building up socialism in one country ·alone--L!u~d
abandoned that position.
- _,
The second reason that induced me to make the declaration
was the conviction that the accusation of Thermidorism we had
made against the Central Committee of the Party was unfounded
and that the program of the Five-Year Plan was a program fof
a great step forward ..
But I must say that I still hadi differences wiith the Party on.
questions of internal Party democracy and when I returned to the
Party these questions temporarily receded into the bac:kground as
far as I am concerned, but they were not entirely eliminated by tbeprogress of events. I was convinced fihat in the future the devel.Qp~
ment of the Five-Year Plan would either Iead to the voluntary ex~·
pansion of internal Party democracy, by the voluntary action of:
the Party ~eadership, or would be the cause of a split in the Parfy~
Thus, summing up my return to the Party, I must confess tha~
since _it was not based on a complete concurrence of U:Y views "?:ti~
the views of the Party, there was an element of tacit reservaho"
82

··~

in il, of duplicity, although I did not return to the Party with the
idea of fighting the Party.
l'yshinsky: Consequently, you returned to the Party while
retaining a certain part of your old Trotskyite views?
Radek: Yes.
l'yshinsky: Andi you said nothing about it?
Radek: Yes, in the declaration which I, Smilga and Preobrazhensky signed, we hinted at this. The leadership of the Party at
the time s.poke of these hints and pointed them out to us, that
we -still had certain hangovers, and that if we did not get rid of
them they would trip us up. This was what we were literally tolcl.
But to speak explicitly, I must say that these hangovers did exisl,
but that I returned witiholllt any intention of fighting the Party.
Vyshinsky: This continued until when?
Radel.;:: \Vhen I returned I made a mistake which was the main
cause of everything that followed. The current of the sum of views
is the sum of human relationships, and you cannot break with the
current without breaking with the people t0gether with whom you
fought for anti-Party aims. ·
During the time I belonged to the Trotskyite bloc I formed very
close relations with a large number of participants in this struggle,
and some of these relations dated hack to an earlier periodl, but
they grew slronger. For example, my relations with the accused
Pvafakov. And when we returned to the Partv we maintained these
relations-unconcealed-I never concealed them-and constantly
v·isited each other; and this became a stumbling block, :because
a large number of Trotskyites who had returned to the Party
were workfog in key positions in various parts of the country at
a time when the fight .for the Five-Year Plan had become acute,
when it had assumed the very acute form of clashes with kulak!'
~jn"some parts of the country and with those elements among the
middle peasants who followed the lead of the kulaks., and these
1
former colleagues in the struggle began to flood! me with informaition o( the mos·t pessimistic character, information which most
:Jfafally affected my opinion of the situation in the country.
~'; Vyshinsk!f: In what year was this?
°tp' Radek: This was in 1930-31. And here there were those trans&~essions which would have justified my being brought to trial even
~r;I had not belonged to the bloc. There was tbe fact that, knowing
~()in these talks of their vacillations-which already exceeded the
· imds of vacillations-I di.d not consider it possible to inform
. '.. Jeadership of the Party of it. For example, if you were to ask
~'.,,~out my responsibllity for the murder of Sergei Mironovich
, -()Y, I must say that this responsibility began not from the mo;: t· I joined the leadership of the bloc, but from that moment
83

in 1930 when a man with whom I had close relations-Safarovcame to me looking black in the face and tried to convince me
thaf lhe_country was on the Verge of ·ruin, and I did not report
th.is-and what were the consequences? Safarov was connected
with Ko-tolynov. If I had told the Party about Safarov's frame of
mind, the Party would have got at the group of the former leaders
of the Leningrad Young Communist League who later became the
leaders of the as.sassination of Kirov. - And -so I declare that my
responsibility dares not only from the time I joined the bloc, but
that the roots of this crime lie in the Trotskyite views with which l
returned and which I had not thoroughly abandoned, and in the
relations I had retained with the Trotskyite-Zinovievite cadres.
Vyshinsky: With which of the Trotskyites did you retain connections?
Radek: I was connected by ties of friendship with Mrachkovsky.
I was connected by old friendship with I. N. Smirnov. I was connected with Dreitzer and with his close assistant, Gayevsky, not
tO mention the old personal friends with whom I was connected
~Pyata:kov, Preabrazhensky, Smilga, and Serebryalwv. What
formed the second storey in our Trotskyite centre in the period
of 1924-27 was all connected with me, I was bound with these
cadres by relations of personal intimacy.
Vyshinsky: This was in 1930-31?
Radek: Yes, this was in 1930 arid 1931. I appraised the situation as follows: the gains of the Five-Year Plan were enormous,
an important step had been made in the direction of in_Q.ustrialization. To a certain extent, the collective farms were -::-ake:;ic;!y a
definite fact. But at the same time, on the basis of the informa1foh
I then possessed and the appraisal of the situation then made by
the Trotskyite -economists I was intimate with-I will mention
Smilga and PPeobrazhensky-I believed that the economic offensive was being conducted on too wide a front, that the materiil
forces available (number of tractors, etc.) would not p-ennit of
universal colleCtivization, and that if this general offensive were
not slowed -down thiswould,aswe defined it by a catch-phrase, "end
like the march on \Varsaw," that at this fast rate industrialization
would produce no results, but would only cause huge expenditure.
Already at that time, in 1931, I thought it was necessary.__t.Q
hold back the offensive, and to mass resources on definite sectors
of the economic front. In short, I dissented on the main question:
on the question of continuing the fight for the Five-Year Plan. To
analyse these disagreements from the social angl~f course, ;J
then believe?·the tactics whichJ-regarded as correct to be the be5t.
Communist tactics-but if one were to ask for the social analysis

84

of this thing I would. have to say: history's joke was that I overestimated the pow~r of resistance, the abilitv, not only o.f the mass
of the kulaks, but also of the middle peasants, to pursue an independent policy. I was scared by the difficulties and thus became
a mouthpiece of the forces hostile to the proletariat.
This brought me right up io Uie question of internal Party
democracy. People begin to argue about democracy only when
they disagree on questions of principle. When they agree they do
not feel the need for broad democracy, that goes without saying.
Vyshinsky: That is already an explanation of the !fact; I want
first to establish the fact itse1f. This was in 1930-31, and then in
1932 the united centre was organized?
Radek: I knew nothing about it.
Vyshinsky: When did you learn a:bout the existence and the
acthities of the united centlre?
Radek: I learned of its :formation in November 1932.
Vyshinsky: From whom?
Radek: Preliminarily, that preparations were being made, I
learned from the letter Trotsky wrote to me in February-March
1932. I learned about the actual formation of the organization from
\Irachkovsky in November 1932.
Vyshinsky: And .in February 1932 you learned from Trotsky
that the bloc was projected. 'Vas this your first message from
Trotsk\·?
.
Radek: The first.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat was the reason that made Trotsky venture.
to write to you a;t a Hime when you were alrea:dy in the Party?·
There are two questions in this question. The first question: did
Trotsky know that you had returned to the Party?
·
Radek: He knew it.
'
Vyshinsky: \Vhy did ·he venture to wr.ite a letter containing
fairly intimate po'litical information to a Trotskyite who had re·turned to the Party? And the second question: how did you receive
iL what were the actual circumstances?
Radek: The explanation is as follows: the Trotskyite leaders
who maintained relations with me and who were at tha!t itime in
communication \vith Trotsky, knew that I was in favour of hold·
. ing back the offensive.
l'yshinsky: Namely?
Radek: ~1ra,chkovsky, Dreitzer and Gayevsky. l <lild not discuss
;·,Il1atters at length with Smirnov, but Mrachkovsky knew what my
··sentiments were.
,~~. Vyshinsky: Before 1932?
.~~·· Radek: Before 1932. 'I1hey kne'!v that I ras for holding back
~[,he offensive.
85

Vyshinsky: That is, that you had retained the old Trotskyite
views?
·
- ·
··
Radek: But at the sametime tf1ey knew that when any of them
insinuated the question of organizing the struggle, I replied in the
negative, that nothing could be <lone, that it was a question of
mass processes, and they themselves feared to approach me with
what was being prepared.
Vyshinsky: But you already realized that they had begun to
prepare .something?
Radek: With regard to somf' of <them I wa.s con~vinced from
the very beginning that they had something in if:he back of their
minds when they returned, and, moreover, something was already
apparent from certain symptoms. For instance, once when I was
walking home from the offices of the Izvestia, I s.aw Smirnov on
the Tverskaya with his former, if one may so express i"t, "Chief of
Staff"--Gins:burg. Observing me, they turned down Gnezdni ·
koysky Pereulok. And I immediately realized that something was
in preparation, that somethin,g was brewing. But they did not come
to me, and did not speak to me openly.
Vyshinsky: In a word, you already al that period noticed that
they were engaged in some underground preparatory work?
Rad ck: I noticed that •Something was thickening, that sentiments
were leading somewhere. But they did not speak openly, because,
since the split with Trotsky in· 1929 was connected with a great
straining of personal relations between-·nie-:md_Trotsky, ·,;,Tho re~
garded me ::is responsible. or one of those most responsible for thP
split of the Trotskyites, they feared to address me thems~ves and
considered that this could be overcome only hy relations beh\~e_en
Trotsky and myself. And to all appcarnnces they informed Trol:s-··
ky, and, knowing of my frame of mind. requested hini to take the
first step so as to make it easier for them lo approach me.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, it may he formulated in this way:
after you ha<l noticed that something was brewing with Mrachkov- I
sky and .Smirnov. they in their turn notice'<l that something was
brewing with you?
.
Radek: They sensed that I \vas in a (1.cpre~sed frame of mind
an<l that this frame of mind might crystallize into definit~ actions.
Vyshinsky: That is, in other words, t!hait you too, to some ex-,
tent. represented soil for ,action of some sort?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Now it is clear why. your correspondence with,
Trotsky arose. This was in 1932?
}
Radek: Yes, in February 1932 I received letter from Trotsky·~·-·.·1
Vyshinskr1: \:Vnat did Trotskv write to you then?
. ;'.
Radek: Trotsky wrote that the information he possessed Ie<f~

a

86

t;

him to conclude that I ha·d become <:onvinced that he was right,
and that without the realization of the· Trotskyite demandrs the
policy would find ~tself at an impasse. Trotsky further wrote that
since he knew me to be .an active person he was convinced that
I wotild return to the struggle.
Vyshinsky: And did Trotsky summon you to the struggle?
Radek: At the end of the letrer Trotsky wrote approximately
as follows: "You must !bear in mind the experience oif the preceding period and realize that for you there can be no returning to the
past, that the struggle has entered a new phase and that the new
feature in this phase is that either we shall be destroyed together
with the Soviet Union, or we must raise the question of removing
the leadership." The word terrorism was not used, but when I
read the words "removing the leadership," it became clear to me
what Trotsky had in mind.
Vyshinsky: Did you reply to th~1 letter?
Radek: No.
Vysllinsk17: How did you take this Jetter?
Radek: Trotsky informed me that not only the Trotskyites but
also the Zinovievites had decided to return to the struggle and
that negotiations for union were under vrny. I sent no reply, believing that the matter must bE' thought over very thoroughly. Approxiqiately al the end of September or of October 1932, I decided
lo return to the road of struggle.
Vyshinsky: Did you think this over carefully; did you consult
anybody?
Radek: I did not consult anybody.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat did you do in a practical way when you
decided to take up the struggle again?
Radek: I knew that the leaders of the organization \vere also
__ \\;ai-tin~ and would take certain steps, that Trotsky had also informed them that he had written me. and I expected to meet them.
Of course I expectt>d Ivan Nikitich Srnirnov or Sergei Vitalyevich
~Irachkovsky to come.
Vyshinsky: Did they approach you?
Radek: I knew that one of them would come, and they came,
and I gave them a reply in the affirmative.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat followed next?
.
Radek: I had a talk with ·Mrachkovskv and asked him: where
\and how do you intend to act? This was at the end of October
j.or beginning of November 1932.
[i~- · Vyshinsky: Mrachkovsky put questions to you and you· put
1;uestions fo him?
.
·

r~adek' He asked me: have ::u received, a letter from the old

Vyshinsky: \\'ho is the old man?
Radek: He meant Trotsky. He asked me: what have you de
cided? I replied: if you had not guessed what I had decided you
would not have put that question to me. I have d~ided to go with
you. Then I asked him how they visualiz·ed the struggle, and what
progress had been made in the matter of joining with the
Zinovievites.
Vyshinsky: What did Mrachkovsky reply?
Radelr: He replied quite definitely that the struggle had entered
the terrorist phase and that in order to carry out these tactics they
had now united w1th the Zinovievites and would set about the
preparatory work.
Vyshinsky: \:Vlwt preparatory work?·
Radek: It was clear that since terrorism was the new position,
the preparatory work must consist in assembling and forming
terrorist cadres. Later l\Iraehkm·sky told me .that since the struggle
would he a very severe one and the sacrifices would be enormous,
they wnuld like to preserve certain cadres in the event of defeat,
that is to r;ay, in the event of arrest, and1 he said that "this is why
we have not included yoit in the first centre." He said this m
reference 'lo me, Pyatak.ov and Sercbrya.kov. ·Vyshinsky: And did he speak to you albout Sokolnikov?
Rndek: He spoke to me about him later. At this juncture the
talk \vas about Trotskyitcs. During the first conversation he expressed the following idea: you must break off connections with
all the 'P<'Ople that used to come and sec you, and he said;) forbid
Dreitzcr to visit you.
_
'"~ . .
Vyshinsky: J\nd was he in a position to forbid Dreitzer::-fo
visit you?
Radek: \Ve regarded him as an organizer, the principal one, hut
although he was not a politician he was a man who gave instructions and who indicated a number of persons who must be held
in reserve. \Ve did not stop at this conversation. The first plan was
that in the event of their arrest we were to go into action.
Vyshinsky: After the new meeting in 1932 did you have other
meetings with ?\frachkovsky?
Radek: I met him in the 1spring and autumn, when be came
to ·Moscow on the pretext of official business, which he- l1ad -tine ..
opportunity to do, and did do. Dur.ing his visits he would in.form
me of the state of affairs. He came again in April 1933.
Vyshinsky: Did he tell you anything about !Bakayev and Reingold?
Radek: ·when he later outlined the scheme of organization of
the bloc, he named Dreitzer as the dtirect leader of the terrorist

88

organization on oµr side, and Bakayev as the leader on the
Zinovievites' side.
Vyshinsky: The direct leader of the terrorist organization?
Radek: Yes ..
Vyshinsky: Did you know anything about the preparations .for
the assassination of Sergei Mironovich_Kirov?
Radek: Wihen we discussed the projected terrorist struggle, the
question arose against 1"hom it should he directed in the first
place.
Vyshinsky: This was in 1932?
.
Radek: ·when the question arose against whom terrorism should
be directed, it concerned terrorism direcil:ed ·against the leading
core of the Central Committee of the c~P.S.U. and the Soviet government. And although not a single name was mentioned during
this oonvCT-sation, I know very well ·wlho are the leaders and did
not have the slightest .doubt that the acts were to be directed against
Stalin and his immediate colleagues, aigainst Kiro.v, Molotov, Vo1;0shilov and Ka.ganovkh.
·
Vyshinsky: \Vere these your deductions or did he say this?
- Radek: There 'Was no necessity to say it ibecause I knew very
well who lead the Party and the Soviet government.
1/yshinsky: I request that the accused Rade'k be presented his
testimony (Vo'l. V, page 106), the record of December 4, which
contains a rather different reply to this question.
Allow me to read it. I read from a certified copy of the record:
"Regarding th{) activities of the Zinovievite-Trotsky.ite group
the information given to me by Mrachkovsky at various times
coincides with what was revealed at the trial. He told me. . . ."
Who is this "he"?
Radek: Mrachkovsky.
Vyslzinsky: " . . . of the role of Bakayev and Reingold, of the
preparations for a terrorist act a.gainst Stalin in Moscow and Kirov
in Leningrad."
.
. Radek: But I said: at various meetings. And it says there: at
various meetings. You are now asking me what was said in the
conversation in November 1932, and I answer what was said later
in the conversation.
Vyshinsky: Did you know from Mrachkovs.ky a.bout !he preparations for terrorist aots agaihst the leaders of the Party and the
government?
Rad.ek: In April 1933. Mrachkovsky.. , .
Vyshinsky: Excuse ine, so as to adhere to procedure--do you
.confirm this testimony?
;.:; .. Ra;fek: Tf;at I knew that preparations were under way for ·an
:'assassmahon?
~:.; ~

89

Vyslzinsky: What I have just read to you. "He (that is. Mrachkovsky) told me (that is, you) of the role of Bakayev and Reingold,
of the preparations for a terrorist ad against Stalin in l\foscow
and Kirov in Leningrad." Do you confirm that Mrachkovsky told
you that?
· Radek: If you do not mean that particular meebing, then I
confirm it.
Vyshinsky: I do not know what meeting this refers to, that one
or another.
Radek: I confirm it.
Vyshinsky: Hence, it transpires that Mrachkovsky did not tell
you this in November 1932, but when?
Radek: The conversation about Kfrov was connected with the
fact that in April 1933 Mrachkovsky asked me whether I could
mention any T:rntskyite in Leningrad who \vould undertake the
organization of a terrorist group thef!e.
Vyshinsky: Against wihorn?
Radek: Against Kirov, of course.
Vyshinsky: He requested your assistance?
Radek: Naming a person is assistance, that is clear.
Vyshinsky: And then?
Radek: I named such a person.
Vyshinsky: You named?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Who was it?
Radek: Prigozhin.
\lyshinsky: Prigozhin? Who could find a murderer? ='->Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: This was in April 1933?
Radek: Yes.
l'yshinsky: And when w<is Kirov killed?
Radek: Kirov was kiHe<l in D{'cember 19~4.
Vyshinsky: Const>quently. many months before this villainous
crime. you, Raidek; knew f'hat the Trotskyiles were preparing to
murder Kirov?
Radek: I can say even more. I knew tlrnt it was being prepared'.
in general, and hy the Zinovievites. becanse since it ha<l been'
decided to strike at the kaders-Kirov was one of ithe most prominent leaders, and the Zinovievites had thek main ·-cen-t.re .fa:
Petrograd-it was clear that their terrorist organization intended;
to strike at Kirov. Moreover. Mrachkovsky told me then that we.
had nothing in Leningrad; the Zinovievites were preparing ther~
and of course we ought to have our own group. That_ much in this1
connection he told me; but he dfi.d not tell me when and whati
w:ould be. He only told me that the Zinovievites in Leningradt
>

~o

~

were preparing for an assassination. He told me that, and I
very clearly, without any ambiguity, knew that this concerned
Kirov.
·vyshinsky: When you say here that l\Irachkovsky informed
you of the role of Bakayev, what do you mean by that?
.
Radek: He did not tell me that Bakayev personally d.irected
the assassination of Kirov, but he named >him as the leader of all
the terrorist groups of the Zinovievites. Idid not know whether
Bakayev would commit this assassination or entrust it to somebody else, hut it was clear to me that the 'Preparations for the
assassination coul<l not proceed without Bakayev.
Vyshinsky: And in Moscow?
Radek: It was also from Dreitzer that I learned alxmt the
Zino\ievites, ~bout the fact that in Moscow Reingold was the
leader. 'Vhen Dreitzer, at Mrachkovsky's request, ha<l to come to
see me to inform me concretely, I asked him, what are you doing?
This and that. . . .
Vyshinsky: What do you mean by this and that?
Radek: He c1escribed to me what lhe Trotskyite.s already had,
and said that matters were in the stage of the formation of cadres.
They were organizing a numher of groups anid were making it
their aim to wage a common struggle with the Zinovievites, to utilize these groups when the period of organization was completed. I
asked him who would lead this preparatory work in Moscow ou
the Zinovievites' side. He said that on the Zinovievites' side the
general leadership was in the hands of Bakayev. just as it was
in the hands of Mrachkovsky on our side, while Reingold was in
charge in Moscow.
i·yshinskg: Thus you were fully informed of the activities of
these terrorist groups?
,
·
_ .f{adek: Of course, .as a member of the centre I was fully informed.
. l'yshinsky: And you were informed of the fact that practical
1preparations for ,assassination were being made?
· Radel.:: I knew about the practical preparntions, foe assemblage
of c~dres, the organization of these cadres, the training of these
.:gdre'>, as a partidpant of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc from its
'.;fery beginning.
·
'· Vyshinsky: And also as a participant in the terrorist acts, one
i~of which was the assassination of Kirov?
!'·. Radek: And also iin the terrorist acts, one of which was the
assination of Kirov.
·
l'yshinskg: Whom did you meet at that time, and what was
subject of your conversations?
I,
Radek: We agreed that we should meet as little as possible.

t

91

Therefore, of the Trotskyi!cs who were members of the first centre,
l\frachkovsky was the only one I used to meet. Ivan Nikitich
Smirnov was arrested at the beginning of 1933, I think in January.
Ter-Vaganyan I ha.d not met since 1932, or since 1931, and in
general Tt:r 'vas not allowed to see me because he had a· large
·circle o.f acquaintances and it wais feared that Ter might cause my
detection. Of the members of the Zinovievite centre, until 1932 I
met Zinoviev and Kamen~v casually. After I joined the movement,
in 1933, I did not ·see them at all. They were at that time in exile
because of their part in and connection with the opposition platform. After they returned, Zinoviev came to see me twice in- 1934.
Furthermore, I saw Kameney once in.the offices of the Bolshevik .
.But I saw them only in public or in our editorial offices, at a banquet in behalf of an anrtiquarian bookshop with which we writers
were all connected. I never discussed these things with Ramenev.
If it is a question of my connection with the Zinovievite part of the
bloc, before the assassination of Kirov this connection consisted
in three me~tings with Zinoviev. And there was one meeting in the
summer of 1934 with G. Y. Sokolnikov, not a member of the first
centre but a member of 1he reserve centre. If it is a question of
my meetings with my colleagues of the reserve centre-Trotskyites
- I saw Pyatakov in Decemiber 1932, a second time at the end of
1933; in 1934 I saw him in the summer, in July; in 1935 I saw
him in July and December; in 1936 I saw him in January. Serehryakov I saw in 1933, in 1935 and.in 1936. I .saw Soko1nikov three
times.
Vyshinsky: And so it may he considernd established that you
learne<:l about terrorism from Mrachkovsky?
:;.,_
Radek: \Tes.
,,,. __ ~
Vyshinsky: This was before you received the letter from
Trotsky?
·
Rodek: This was after I received the letter from Trotsky. The
letter from Trotsky was received in February or March 1932 11
Vyshinsky: That is, in February 1932 you received a letter from
Trotsky in which he already spoke of the necessity of getting rid
of. . . .
·
Radek: Hemoving.
Vyslzinsky: . . . of ~he necessity of removing; consequently,
you understood that terrorism was meant?
·
Radek: Of c.ourse.
-- - - ·
Vyshinsky: If the materials of the preliminary investigation are
correct, you were in Geneva in the spring of 1932?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In Geneva did you meet with anyl;>ody and speak of
subjects of this kind?.
92

Radek: The only Trotskyite I met in Geneva was V. Romm.
He brought me a letter from Trotsky.
l'yshinsky: That is, you received it.his letter from Trotsky in
Geneva?
Radek: Yes.
l'yshinsky: How are these <lates to be reconciled-February
1932 and the spring?
Radek: February in Geneva is alrea.dy the !beginning of the
spring, and so I conceived this period as the spring. Il may have
been in March.
Vyshinskg: And so, let us get all these facts right. You re.ceived
the letter from Trotsky Jn Geneva in· the spring of 1932 through
V. Romm. Did you receive the letter from Trotsky through Romm
unexpectedly?
Radek: A'.bout Romm's connections with Trotsky I personally
knew nothing until that moment. I know Romm sinoe 1922. During
the period of the Party struggle, when the Trotskyite opposition
was formed, he was not active in a general sense, in the general
Trotskyite work. He adhered to us on the Chinese question. He
is an expert on foreign policy. He is interested in the Far East.
Through the differences \'l"ith the Comintern on the Chinese
question, he became preoccupied with this question, and sin<::e
we had been close in work on foreign affairs, I was the per-·
~011 closest to him, from whom he took his bearings. vVhen I
returned from exile, about a year after that, Romm, who had been
in Tokio, came to Moscow. We said nothing definitely about the
struggle against the Party, but I told him that the situation in the
country was fraught with upheavals and said tQ him: "Volodya, we
may have to become active again."
Vyshinsky: This was in 1931?
Radek: In 1931, probably. Therefore Romm is quite right when
he savs in his testimonv that when he was asked to transmit this
letter: he considered th:l.t iby transmitting the letter to me he would
be executing my wishes. And when Romm says that I am responsible for his return to the opposHion, it is true. It was I .who led him
into a Soviet prison.
Vyshinsky: \V!hat do you know aibout the terroris.t activities o.f
other groups?
Radek: I cannot fix the -dates of the first period. I understand
your question to be: what- <do I know about the \vhole period. I
will mention the groups. I had unspecified information in the
period of 1933-34 about the existence of groups, of the organization of a number of groups in Moscow. They were led by Dreitzer,
' but I did not know their perso?nel. That was the preparatory
stage. Apart from Moscow I knew in 1934 about the formation of a
93

group which we, among ourselves, called the ''historical or hysterical" group. It was a group consisting of historians under the leadership of Friedland. I learned about this group because in 1934
Dr·eitzer's deputy, Gayevsky, informed me that a group of serious
people was being formed, that it would not operate now and would
be kept in reserve in case of discovery.
I knew of the existence of the Zinovievite organization in
Leningrad.
About the Trotskyite organizations I knew that Prigozhin was
forming a group there, but I did not know of whom. \Vhen he
reported to me in 1934 he mentioned three or four names, which
meant nothing to me, and I cannot say who they were. l recalled
one during the preliminary examination and I mentioned it. ·
About the Ukraine, Yuri Leonidovich Pyatakov told me that
the Ukrainian centre--he named Kotsyubinsky, Golubenko and, I
think, Loginov-was forming a terrorist group which would act
against the lea•ders of the Communist Party and the Soviet government of the Ukraine.
As regards the Siberian group, Pyatakov told me that it was
being formed there. I think that he mentioned the name of Muralov
in this connection.
In addition, he said that some kind of terrm·ist group had been
formed, or was being formed in Tula.
Vyshinsky: Did Pyatakov mention names?
Radek: He did riot l'nentTori names·and· Ieaders but sa1d that
this group was connected with Dityateva. Moreover, much later,
in 1935, f heard of the formation of a group in Rostov-on-Don
by Byeloborodov. It was also known that Mdivani had for.hied a
group.
In 1935 1 heard about the Zinoviev group, Lhis was the ZaksGladnyev group with which my assistant, Tivel, was connected in
.Moscow. He came to me and stated, on Sokolnikov's instructions,
as he said, that as he was working in my office he was subjecting
me to great danger as he was connected with this group. He came
to me and said that this group existed, that he was connected
with it, that apparently it was broken up in Petrograd and had
transferred its activities to Moscow where it was engaged in preparing for a terrorist act against the leaders of the Party and the
government. At first they intended to make an attempt in_illl:e very
premises ·of the Central Committee, as he told me. When I foia1-~
him that this was sheer madness he agreed with me and said :that
simultaneously they were watching ~uts.ide the building of the
Central Committee, keeping track of the routes used by the members of the government anid members of the Central Committee of
the Party.

94

Vyshinsky: A whale lot of groups?
Radek: Yes. I did not know about all of them, I was not in
immediate charge of this act. But if we are to speak of political,
juridical and moral responsibility, you may hold me responsible
for all the groups, even for those of :which I did not know.
That means that I must bear responsibility for all the centre
did through the medium of its organs.
Vyshinsky: Do you know a.bout the terrorist group which
operated in Tula?
Rrulel;: I knew of its existence.
Vyshinsky: Did you know that it ex,isted as a terrorist group?
Radek: Of course.
Vysliinsky: That it was preparing an attempt on the lives
of the leaders of our Party and government?
Radek: Why, clearlJ..
l'yshinsky: That was clear to you?
Radek: That is all a terrorist ,group is engaged in.
Vyshinsky: And you knew that?
Radek: Of course.
Vyshinsky: From whom did you hear that?
Radek: From Pyatakov. He did not tell me anything dellnite
about the personnel, but he said< there was a group in Tula under
the direction of Dityateva.
Vyshinsky: Hence you heard of this from Pyatakov?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And what about the Urals?
Radek: I don't remeI111ber anything about the Ural group; I cannot mention any names. I had heard abou:t t:he Yulin group.
Vyshinsky: What about Western Siberia? Radek: About \Vestern Siberia. One of the lea<lers menti.oned
_was :\Iuralov.
·. Vyshinsky: From whom did you hear about him?
Radek: From Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: What about the Byeloborodov group?
Radek: I had heard about the existence of the Byeloborodov
group from two sources: from Pyatakov and from Evgeny Preohrazhensky.
Vyshinsky: What about the Zaks-·Gladnyev group in Moscow?
Radek: I heard abolJ,t it first from Tivel, and later I had confamation of its existence during a conversation with Sokolnikov.
Vyshinsky: And lastly the Prigozhin group?
Radek: T4e Prigozhin group of Leningrad. I learned of its ex-_ istence from the fact that at Mrachkovsky's request I sent Dreitzer
:,; to Prigozhin, and when Prigozhin arrived in Moscow I asked him:
:;: ','\Yhat have you done with the people you had over there?" He

i_' -

95

rqlli-cd that he had put them in touch with the Trolskyite, Zeidel.
It was he whom I instructed to get in touch with Friedland.
Ygshinsky: Who directed the Prigozhin group?
Radek: A.s it did not go into action and existed three or four
months, during which they only negotiated, evidently the ques.tion
of leadership in the technical sense never arose among them. ·
Vyshinsky: Who was responsible for this organization?
· Radek: P:rigozhin was responsible to us for this group.
Vyshinsky: \Vih-0 was responsible for the organization of this
group?
Radek: Prigoz.hin.
Vyshinsky: And who directed Prigozhin?
Radek: Prigozhin was subordinated to Dreitzer, but as Dreitzer
never got to him, dbviously, if it were necessary to give him any
instructions, I would have given them.
Vyshinsky: If you give instructions you are 1he leader?
Radek: If I giYe instructions I am the lea·der, but what I did
so far was to ,give instructions to create tlhis group. I had no occasion to direct it; but had there been occasion to do so I would have
directed it.
Vyshinsky: You created the group?
Radek: Tihe group was created by Prigozhin.
l/yshins/..:g: But Prigozhin was suggested by you?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: H~ ,\ras the mai:1 you sent for tliat purpose?
Radek: He was the man I found for the purpose of organizing
a terrorist group.
:'~
Vyshinsky: On your instructions did he get in toucl1 wit-l~..the
Zinovievites, or with Mrachkovsky, or with Dreitzer?
Radel.:: I cannot say what actually happened. Mrachkovsky
askt..-d me, but as regards Pr1gozih:in I sai<l Miat this fellow was no
use for any sort of serious- terrorist work, either as an executor
or as an organizer-a terrible squabbler, who would upset the group
from the very start; but he was to look for people. The question
arose of testing thesie people. \¥ e thereupon agreed that Dreitzer
should test this group either himself or through this man. Neither
Dreitzer nor Mrachkovsky ever told me what they did about this.
As for Prigozhin, he reported to me in the summer of 1934 that
he had found, as he thought, some suitable people, but- they had.
no time to do anything as he was transferred to Moscow.
Such was the concrete situation.
Vyshinsky: But did he apply to you frequently during this
prriod of time concerning terrorist affairs?
Radek: I saw him in 1933 when I gave him instructions, and
in the summer of 1934 when he moved to Moscow. His statement
91)

that he saw me in 1935 is untrue, as are three-quarters of Prigozhin's statements regarding other persons.
Vyshinsky: Let us take those facts which arc true according
to you.
Did you see Prigozhin in the autumn of 1934?
Radek: That was in July or August, but in 1934 I only saw him
once. He told me that he .llad begun to prepare people, to select
them, but he was transferred and they-had no time to do anything.
Vyshinsky: 'Why was it necessary for him to tell you rather
than anyone else that he had selected people?
Radek: Because I had given him these instructfons.
Vysliinsky: So it was you who found Prigozhin? You sent Prigozhin to Leningrad?
Radek: He lived in Leningrad.
Vyshinsky: With whom did you put him in touch?
Radek: He was to put me ~n touch, not I him.
I said to him: "The !task of the centre is to form a terrorist
group in Leningrad; select the people and then let me see how
!hings are going."
Vyshinsky: Hence, as far as this part is concerned, the responsibility for directing Prigozhin's work in preparing for this
act lies on whom?
Radek: On me.
Vyshinsky: \Vho then directed Prigozhin m th~s preparatory
work?
Radek: I, Radek.
Vyshinsky: In the autumn, when he told you that he was_ transferred lo Moscow, what was the upshot of your conversation with
him at that time?
Radek: That he would be transferred to the Friedland group
and see to it that it was _not exposed. This was a terrorist group.
I did not know all its members, but three names were mentioned
to me: Friedland, Vanag and Piontkovsky. The group was under
the direct supervision of Gayevsky and he said to me: "This will
be your reserve." Gayevsky was Dreitzer's deputy.
Vyshinsky: Who represented the centre?
Radek: Dreitzer was directly connected with Mrachkovsky.
Vyshinsky: And who in this group had connection with your
special centre?
Radek: Mrachkovsky attached Gayevsky to me for contact
purposes.
Vyshinsky: Hence Prigozhin represented you, and you are re.;;ponsible?
Radek: Ye$.
97

Vyshinsky: And you found him, established connection with
him and put him on terrorist work'?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vas Gayevsky connected with Dreitzer's t.ertorist
group?
· Radek: I must explain.
Vyshinsky: Give me a straight answer.
Radek: Gayevsky was the man Dreitzer attached to me in the
event of it being necessary to communicate with Dreitzer.
_
Vyshinsky: Hence, ihe was connected with you from the centre.
Consequently, the line runs from the centre to Prigozhin, from
you to Gayevsky. Hence, you were -connected with the Dreitzer
group through Gayevsky. Thus, you also directed the Dreitzer
group.
Hadek: No, Dreitzer was subordinated to Mrai:-hkovsky, and
Gayevsky was attached to me for contact purposes.
Vyshinsky: 'Who gave them their insfructions?
Radek:. Mrachkovsky. Up to Mr:achkovsky's arrest, Dreitzer
was subordinated to l\lraohkovsky.
Vyshinsky: And after l\frachkovsky's arrest you establisht>d
connection with Dreitzer?
Radek: After Mrachkovsky's arrest I ·did not manage to establish any connection with Dreitzer; 1 did not see him and was unable
to obtain any in.fotmflti6rf nr·intimations from him.
Vysl1insky: But these connl:"ctions were to have passed to you?
Radek: Yes, to me.
"'"
Vyshinsky: As a member of the reserve centre?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You were lo have established connection with
Friedland as a member of l:he terrorist group. In that period who
directed all the activities?
Radek: If you ask me who directed, then. of course, had Pfigoz.hin come and told me about the preparatory work I woul::J
have had to reply.
Vyshinsky: Hence, Prigozhin had to receive instructions on the
preparatory work in that period from you and he was not connected with the other members?
Radek: Yes.
--·- - - Vyshinsky: That is why yon say that you personally directed
his terrorist activities and personally guided him?
Radek: Yes.
. Vyshinsky: \Vilh whom else ·did you discuss the question of
terrorism?
Radek: I discusst'd it with the memhers of the centre whom I
. 98

had occasion to meet and with whom I had to settle certain ques. tions.
1/yshinsky: \Vhom can you name?
Radek: I have named Preobrazhensky. I can also state with
whom there was a conversation along general lines-that was
Smilga.
Vyshinsky: And the group of the Rights?
Radek: It goes without saying that I was connected with
Bukharin.
Vyshinsky: It goes without saying? What concrete facts can
you mention concerning connections with the group of the Rights?
Radek: I had connections only with Bukharin. I saw Tomsky
only in 1933 when he spoke in very sharp terms about the internal
sihmtion in the Party.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat conversations did you have with Bukharin?
Radek: If you mean conversations aibout terrorism I can .enumerate them concretely. The first conversation took place in June
or July 1934, after Bukharin came· to work for Izvestia. At that
time he and I conversed as members of two centres which were in
contact with each other. I asked him: "You have taken the path
of terrorism?" He said: "Yes." When I asked him who was directing this activity he mentioned! Uglanov and himself, Bukharin.
Duriµg the conversation he said to me that it was necessary to prepare cadres from among the academic youth. Technical and other
concrete matters were not discussed in our conversation. Mrachkovsky once tried to put this question to Bukharin, but Bukharin
replied: ·'\Vhen you are appointed commander-in-chief of all the
terrorist organizations we will put it all out on the table for you."
Vyshinsky: So Bukharin kept things secret?
. Radel.:: Kept things secret in the same way as I kept things
secret from him in these matters, apart from what Mrachkovsky
related; but there was no <loubt ;that l\frachkovsky was directing
these activities in our centre.
Vyshinsky: What other conversations did you have?
Radek: That \\'as one conversation about terrorism.That was
all he told me on that oocasion. The next conversation regarding
terrorism-in fact, two or maybe three conversations-took place
at the end of December 1934, after the assassination of Kirov. These
conversations took place under great difficulties, because the editorial staff at that time was working all night almost without a
break. Bukharin's office was continually frequented by a large
number of people, and only on the second day or on the third day
- I cannot exactly say which-did I succeed in finding a spare
moment, when we first exchanged opinions. As neither he nor I
knew the nnme of Nikolayev, did not even know that Nikolayev
99

was a member of the Party at the moment when he carried out
the assassination, it was clear to us that the assassination was the
work of one of the terrorist groups either of the bloc or of the
Right groups. We could not for the moment decide which it had
been, but it was clear to us that it was the work of these orgarii~
zations.
This was the first thing we decided in the first conversation.
In subsequent conversations, when the situation had become
c}earer, we reverh~d to this subject, discussing it pithily as was
usually the case when we met in such a way, and exchanged
opinions regarding our estimate of the political consequences of
the assassination of Kirov.
We became convinced that this murder had not produced the
results the organizers had expected. It was not justified by the
nesults; it wa.s not a blow at the Central Committee; it did not
rouse sympathy among the masses of the people aS the TrntskyitesZinovievites had expected it would; on the contrary, it resulted
in the masses of the peo];>le unitin,g around the Central Committee;
it led to the arrest of a large number of Zinoviavites and Trotskyites.
Already at that time we said to ourselves: eHher this act, the
result of the tactics of individual terrorism, demands the cessation
of terrorist actions or it demands that we go further and commit a
terrorist ad against a whole group.
These were the first ideas-we exchanged under the impression
of the situation that had been created by the assassination of
Kirov.
. Bukharin informed me that in their centre ther-ft were many
who considered that it would be frivolous and cowardlf =tt»·give
up terrorism altogether because of the results of Kirov's murder;
that, on the contrary, it was necessary to pass on to a systematic,
thought-out, serious struggle, to pass on from guerrilla tactics to
planned terrorism.
·
.'I
Vyshinsky: I am intere~ted ~n this very question about guerrilla
tactics. It is just the subjeCt which you touched upon yesterday.
Radek: All of us who were closely associafJed with the leadership of the Rights or with the leadership of the Zinov1eviteTrotskyite bloc could not fail to talk, could not fail to t:hink
about this matter from the moment when we were confronted
with the lesson of the assassination of Kirov; and-T-mu-st ·a<lJ.nit
that I had thought about it evan before that.
. Vyshinsky: And from what angle, exactly, did you think about
it?
Radek: I have no practical exper.ience whatsoever in the
sphere of terrorist struggle, but I know from history, from books100

not only the history of Narodnaya Volya, I know the great practical experience .of the Polish terrorists-and so I had to ask
myself whether it was possible for the bloc to achieve the aims it
had set itself by firing at individual people, and firing, moreover,
at long intervals. Moreover-:::-in answer to this question-I knew
something about the difference of our organs of state security from
other such organs in other countries and in the old days. I knew
that, as distinct from the latter, ·our organs of state security have
the tremendous support of the broadest masses of the people, who
will inform them about any suspicious case; and while they might
let themselves be taken unawares on one occasion, they are sufficiently versed in sociology to undierstan<l that such things as the
assassination or Kirov are not like pimples which imrst out for a
short time and then disappe.ar, but that they are the expression
of certain incipient groups and tendencies. I was therefore connnced that the organs of state security would take all measures to
render impossible the carrying out of individual terrorist acts.
In addition to this, I stood in too close proximity to the leadership not to see that these measures were already being taken in
practice. And it was clear to me that we were therefore confronted
with the question: either this individual terrorist action could be
carried on at random in the hope that something would come of
it-and this was a senseless idea--0r the fighting side must
und·erstand and face the question of what it coUld do. And such
an idea about what to do was present in our minds. The gist of
these ideas, if we take the political side of the matter, was that
here it was a ,question ;Of selecting persons of quite a specific type
from a specific point of view, that 1his was decisive-a specific
selection connected with this plan.
I discussed this question in July 1935 with Bukharin, with Pyatakov and Sokolnikov.
·
·
·
,
Vyshinsky: Hence, you were not a supporter of guerrilla
. thods of action?
·
. Radek:. Lwas an opponent of gueITilla tactics from the very
beginning.
·
Vyshinsky: You did not consider this method a serious one?
Permit me to ask you, and you will answer afterwards. I as~ you:
were there, then, two systems of terrorist struggle? One, which you
· call the guerrilla system, anti another, whicli you have called
planned and serious work?
· ·
Radek: Yes. Therefore I did not consider the path of individual
terrorism a serious one.
·
Vyshinsky: Did you stand for the first or the second.system of
terrorist struggle?
·
Radek: I stood for the old system until I became convin~ed that

me-

'.lOf

this struggle was just a guerrilla struggle. Then I stood for a
systematic terrorist struggle.
_ Vyshinsky: ·when you \verc informed about the activities of the
Tivel group, about the Zaks-Gladnyev group, about the Prigozhin
group or about his activities, about the Zeidel .group, about the
. Byeloborodov grourp, about the Muralov group--what was your
point of view then?
Radek: These were groups which arose at various times. Permit
me, therefore, to split up my reply.
Vyshinsky: I am referring to the period as a whole.
_
Radek: You are referring to two periods: up to the end of 1934
and after.
·
Vyshinsky: In what period did lhe !\foralov group arise?
Radek: I heard about it in 1935.
Vyshinsky: Very well, we will ask Muralov. Accused Muralov,
were you the leader of the terrori~t group in \Vestern Siberia'!
Muralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Since when?
Jl.furalov: Since 1931.
Vyshinsky: Until. . . .
Aluralov: lTntiI the day of my arrest.
Vyshinsky: Were you a supporter o.f the guerrilla system or
of the organized, planned system?
lvluralov: Generally speaking I am not a guerrilla fighter, and
took measures to prevent guerrilla methods and to .have organized
action.
Vushinsky: Ever since 1931'!
Muralov: Later, approximately, as Hadek says, after 1934.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, after the murder of Kirov"?>-_,
Muralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And before that murder you were not clear about
the system?
llfuralov: No.
'I
Vyshinsky: But you had a group and were engaged in preparations?
.ilfuralov: Yes.
V11shinsky (to Radek): ·when did you lwar about the Bycloborodov group?
Radek: I heard about it in 1935.
Vyshinsku: And about the Zeidel group?
·- - - - · Radek: I heard about it at the end of 1934; I did not know exactly whether it was definitely formed, or whether it referred only
to Zeidel personally. I had no pre_cise information.
Vysbinsky: What about the ~~<livani group?
Radek: I heard about it in December 1935.
102.

Vyshinsky: So that you .knew of most .of them after the murder
·
Radel.:: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In that period all the groups existed, all were making preparations?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you still called this. guerrilla tactics?
Radek: Guerrilla tactics in cvHy way.
Vyshinsky: Hence, your position was the same as that adopted
by these groups, you were in agreement _with these group~, gave
instructions to these groups; nevertheless, you thought they would
not lead lo the proper results and that the tactics ought to be
changed?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Hence, in that period, in 1934-35, your position was
that of organized, systematic, ,perpetration of whole groups of terrorist acts?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you discuss this with other members of the
centre?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: With whom in particular?
Radek: I distinctly remember that I discussed it with Pyatakov
and Sokolnikov.
· ·· Vyshinskfj: Hence, your position at that time was that you
recognized the necessity of a systematic, regular, organized group
struggle?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: But you did not regard these groups as the organized group struggle you were thinking about?
Radek: That is so-neither in personnel nor in the tasks they
set themselves.
Vyshinsky: Having come to the conclusion that it was necessary 'to pass to committing terrorist .acts against groups, did you
take any measures to organize this strug~le?
Radek: I did. In July 1935 I raised the question, first before
Pyatakov, and later before Sokolnikov in a conversation I had with
him: either we continue the struggle or we abandon it.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat was the reply?
Radek: TI1e answer was: "We shall continue." In that case it
was necessary to know what forces we had at our disposal.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, the first point was to take stock of
your forces?
Radek: Yes, the first point was to.take stock of our foroes. The
second point: when we knew what forces we had at our disPQsal~
of Kirov?

103

we had to draw up· a plan bf action, and in accordance with this
plan of action, decide whether these forces were suitable or
whether we had to create new forces to carry out the plan.
Vyshinsky: if these forces were suitable, set them to work; and
.Jf unsuitable. . . .
·
Radek: If unsuitable, then there was no sense in setting them
to work. These were not specialists who could engage in nothing
but terrorism.
Vyshinsky: I am not interested to know what kind of specialists they were or what they could do besides. If these forces were
unsuitable, what had to be done?
Radek: In that case we had to form new forees, from the
viewpoint of our objectives.
Vyshins-ky: That is to say, either set these forces to work after
testing their qualities, or prepare new forces? You, as a member
of the centre, had the task of taking sitock of the forces, as<.'ertaining their fighting capacity, and setting them to work or prep::iring
new ones as the case might be?
· Radek: Yes, that was how matters stood.
Vyshinsky: What measures did you take?
Radek: Then we decided to put an end to the situation in which
nobody bore responsibility for the terrorist work: \Ve decided
to call Dreitzer, whom, after Mrachkovsky's arrest, we regarded
as the most suitable person to direct terrorist acts, to ascertain
what he intended to do and jointly with him to draw up a plan.
Vyshinsky: Hence, first of all you wanted to unify the leadership of the terrorist groups?
"'""
Radek: Yes.
"' ·
~
Vyshinsky: And whom did you thin1k of as leader?
Radek: Dreitzer.
-Vyslzinsky: Did you establish contact with him?
Radek: I wrote a letter to Dreitzer. I could not go to Krivoy
Rog myself. I wrote in veiled language. In such cases :it is cu{tomary to send. a postcard with a· love message, I wrote him that
after the disaster that had befallen father we had to settle what
to <lo ·next. You do not know· how much we have left, we do not
know what you are doing, and so forth. Be sure to come. This
family tangle must be straightened out.
·
·
In .answer, I received a letter from him saying he .wa.s Jyirig
sick; no· one came to ·visit him, and he could not leave; as soon as
he .got well he would come. At first I thought that Dreitzer had
some information of a conspirative character which prevented him
from acting at that moment, that perhaps he knew he was under
suspicion-so I said to :myself. But several months passed and no
answer came from Dreitzer, And then I began to grow suspicious;
""""-

104

--

I knew Drcitzer too well to think that it was a case o.f cowardiicc
or excessive caution, and I did not believe that Drei·tzer was unable
to find a way of getting in touch with me.
At first we, too, did nothing after the assassination of Kirov,
hut months passed-July, August, September, October-and not a
word from DreHzer. Then I decided to arrange to go to Dniepropetrovsk to speak there, so that I could get there in this way and
see Dreitzer. ·1 was frequently receiving applications from Druepropelrovsk to deliver a lecture in Zaporozhye and Krivoy Rog, so I
resolved that at one of the forthcoming Party plenums I would
have a talk with one of the secretaries either fro:in Dniepropetrovsk
or from Krivoy Rog, and say I wanted to see the Dnieper Power
Station again, so that they would invite me to ~ome there and I
wou:J.d thus be able 1:0 see Dreitzer. Then came a new event:
Trotsky's December directives, which presented all the problems
in their full scope. It was no longer a question of the plan now,
but of something much broader.
·
Vyshinsky: In what year was this?
Radek: In 1935. But notwithstanding this, we decided to call
·a conference. And before this-'-in January, when I arrived-Vitaly
Putna came to see me with some request from Tukhachevsky. I
said: "TI1is is no wav for a leader to .act. There has been no news
of this man for six months. Get ho'ld of ihi.m, dead or alive." Putna
promised. But when I received no answer from Putna, I wrote
Dreitzer a letter telling him categorically that "by the end of
February or the beginning of March you must be here." And I
received the reply from him: "I'm coming." So from this appraisal
that I had made of guerrilla tactics, I drew practical conclusions,
endeavouring to find out the exact position in order to put an iend
to guerrilla tactics and to see whether we coold go on to some-thing more decisive that would give us certain prospeds from the
!viewpoint of terrorist action. I must say that whereas before receiving Trotsky's directives my endeavours
get Dreitzer to come
had been made with the positive aim of .getting him for a planned
. terrorist action, the situation uhderwent a decisive change for me
: from the moment of Trotsky's last directive, about which you
wiil probably ask me specially.
.
Vyshinsky: "While you were ascertaining whaif: forces you had
and were looking for Dreitzer, all these groups continued to exist
and function?
·
Radek: Thev continued to exist and function.
Vyshinsku: ·And you knew about this?
Radek: I knew about it in part.
Vyshinsky: Very well. Now Jet us ·pass to your work m the
sphere of foreign relations.

to

l05

The President: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*

*

*

(;omnwndant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: The session is resumed. Are there any qucslioris?
Vyshinsky: Accused Radek, will you please tell the Court about
the co-ntents of your correspondence with Trotsky concerning questions of, if one may so express it, foreign policy.
The President:'! must warn you, accused Radek, that you mu;;t
not in open court mention th~ names of official foreign institutions or the names of their officials.
Radek: May I mention the nam-es of countries?
The Presid~nt: I repeat, you must not' mention the names of
official foreign institutions or the names of officials in open Court.
Radek: I received three letters .from Trotsky: in April 1934, in
December 1935 and in January 1936. In the letter of 19:34 Trotsky
put the question in this way: fhe accession of fascism to power
in Germany had fundamentally changed the whole situation. It
implied '\var in the near future, inevitable war,' the more so that
the situation was simultaneously becoming acute in t•he Far East.
Trotsky had no doubt that this war would result in the defeat of
the Soviet Union. This defeat, he wrote, will create favourable
conditions for the accession to power of the blor. And from this he
drew the conclusion that the bloc was interested in sharpening the
conflicts. He reproached Sokolnikov and myself for committing
ourselves in too personal a way in the struggle for peace, but, he
said, if such arc your duties, iwthing can be done aJ>out it:
but why, when talking with a certain representative of C{!rfain
Far Eastern power, did not Sokolnikov give a sufficiently Clearanswer, showing his solidarity with the demarche which Trotsky
had already made in regard to this power? In this letter Trotsky
stated that he had established contacts with a certain Far Eastern
slate and a certain Central European state, and that he had openly~
fold semi-official circles of these states that the bloc stood for a
bargain with them and was preparied to make considerable concessions both of an economic and territorial character. In his
letter he demanded that we in Moscow take the opportunity to
confirm to the representatives of these states our agreement with.
his steps. I communicated the contents of this letter to__F._>yatakov
and asked him whether he, Pyatakov, knew about this conveisa=tion of Sokolnikov with Far Eastern diplomats which had caused
Trotsky's dissatisfaction.
Pyatakov said that he knew nothing about it.
. Vyshinsky: \Vhat was it that caused dissatisfaction in this conversation?

a

106

Radek: From the letter it was _supposed that I knew Kamenev's
instructions. I personally understood that Sokolnikov had evidently
confined himself to confirming the mandate, and thought that
Pyatakov knew more concretely. Here I slightly differ from what
Sokolnikov has said. At all eycnts in July 1934 Sokolnikov
visited me at the Izvestia offices and communicated to me the sub-.
stance of the conversation he had had with Mr. - - . Sokolnikov
said: •·Just imagine, I am conducting official negotiations at the
People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs. The conversation draws
to a close. The interpreters have left the room. The official representative of a certain foreign state, Mr. - - , suddenly turned
to me and asked: am I informed about the proposals Trotsky has
made to his government? I replied," said Sokolnikov, "that I was,
that these were serious proposals and advice, and that I and my
friends were in agreement with them." Sokolnikov also said
that Kamenev had warned him some time previously that representatives of foreign countries might approach him or me and
that at that time, as far as I remember, there was some kind of
aci"ice which Trotsky had given .them concerning the position in
the Far East. And here Sokolnikov, a very restrained man in general-and still more restrained in regard to me, since our relations
were purely business ones ·and not personal relations-showed
great_ irritation and said to me: "How does Trotsky visualize that?
How Cl'J."fl J, as Assistant People's Cnmmissar, conduct such negotiations? This is an absolutely impossible !Situation." I do not recall
precisely how \he expressed himself, but rit ·was very disapprovingly
in regard to this advice. Thereupon I said to h~m. "Don't get
excited. He obviously does not understand the situation here."
Pyatakov and I axrived at the conclusion that we could not go
beyond endorsing the mandate for negotiations. We could not
conduct negotiations here, in the first place because we would
have to conduct these negotiations with third-rate persons, in the
second place because we did not know just what Trotsky had said,
and in the third place because we did not think it wise to conduct negotiations under the eyes of the People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs-we did not think that these were good conditions
for the negotiations, and I was to write to _Trotsky to this effect.
I draw special attention to the fact that I spoke to Sokolnikov
because I was afraid that since Sokolriikov was representing the
Zinovievite organization, and he and I were not on very intimate
terms, a rift might be caused_ owing to the scolding which Trotsky had given him from abroad.
.
Through Romm, who went abroad in May, I sent Trotsky a
letter acknowle<i!ging the receipt of his instructions and stating that
we had agreed among ourselves not to take any steps beyond
107

endorsing his mandate to negotiate with foreign countries. In addition, I added: not only we officially as the centre, but I personally
approved of his seeking contacts with foreign states. But while
still at Geneva I was told that if, in the light of old experience,
we wanted to avoid the aggravation of disagreements that might
a.rise in the course of our work, he asked me to write with complete fra'nkness if I had any doubts a.bout his proposals and steps.
I wrote that what- I regarded in his directive as indisputable was
the fact that if the bloc was reckoning with the possibility of .coming to power in one way or another as a real possibility, this could
not happen in a vacuum, for the U.S.S.R. existed among other
states, and we must therefore know whht the enemy wanted, what
he was aiming at, what he could demand, how far he was ready
to go, and that therefore not only we officially, as a centre, but
I personally approved of the fact that he was seeking contact.
But on my own part I would take the liberty of drawing his attention to the following: that in the first place, considering the state in
which the bloc was, it would only compromise itself completely
by establishing such contact directly, would deliver itself into the
enemy's hands.
·
As the third point concerning aims, I told him the following:
that it was O'Ile thing to take the stand that war would create
the conditions under which the bloc would come to power, and
another thing to try to bring about this war; that, leaving on one
side the whole political significance of the endeavour to bring
about war, I drew his attention-this was my private opinion, as
I wrote--to the fact that the bloc, which existed in 193~, could do
very little, because owing to the exile of Zinoviev and Xamenev,
it had wound up its activities and was in the first stage of organization; and that even if this war were to begin now, it would lead
to defeat, but we would be engulfed by the war and would not
play any role whatever. I wrote this to him, for I thought that
none of the others would venture to voice these warnings, and s~
I deemed it necessary to write to him.
Vyshinsky: This was fo May 1934?
Radek: This was in May 1934. In the autumn of 1934, at a
diplomatic reception, a diplomatic representative of a Central
European country who was known to me, sat down beside me and
started a conversation. Well, he started this conversation- in. a
manner that was not very stylish. He said (speaking German):
"I feel I want to spew. . . . Every day I get German newspapers
and they go for you tooth and nail; and I get Sovtiet newspapers
and you throw mud at Germany. What can one do under these
circumstances?" He said: "Our leaders" (he said that more ex~
plicitly) "know that Mr. Trotsky is striving for a rapprochement

·109

with Germany. Our leader wants to know, what does this idea of
.Mr. Trotsky's s.lgnify? .Perhaps it is the idea of an emigre who
sleeps badly'.? Who i.s behinci these ideas?" It was clear that I
was being asked about the attitude of the bloc. I could not suppose
that this was an echo of any of Trotsky's articles, because I read
everything that was written by Trotsky, watched what he wrote
both in the American and in the French press; I was fully informed about what Trotsky wrote, and I knew that Trotsky had
never advocated the idea of a rapprochement with Germany in
the press. If this representative said that he knew Trotsky's views,
that meant that this representative, while not, by virtue of· his
position, a man whom his leader treated confidentially, was consequently a representative who had been commissioned to ask
me. Of course, his talk with me lasted only a couple of minutes;
the atmosphere of 1a diplomatic reception is not suited for le11gthy
perorations. I had to make my decision literally in one second
and give him an answer, and I told him that altercation between
two countries, even if they represent diametrically opposite social
systems, ·is a fruitless matter, but that sole attention rmust not be
paid to these newspaper alter·cations. I . told him that realist
politicians in the U.S.S.R. understand the significance of a GermanSoviet rapprochement and are prepared to make the necessary.
t:oncessions to achieve this rapprochement. This representative
understood that since I was speaking about realist politicians it
meant that there were realist politicians and unrealist politicians in the U.S.S.R.: the unrealist politicians were the Soviet :government, while the realist politicians were the Trotsky-ite-Zinovievite bloc. And he also understood that what I meant was: if 1:he
bloc comes into pnwer it will make concessions in order ·to bring
about a rapprochen1ent with your government and the country
which it represents. In making that reply I understood that I was
committing an act inadmissible for a citizen of the Soviet Union.
Vyshinsky: This is all connected with the first letter?·
Radek: This was a result of the first letter, but it was not the
only result of that Jetter.
Vyshinsky: Didi you, between April and November 1934, have
any conversation with other members of the centre on the subject;;
connected with this letter?
Radek: I informed Pyafakov, Sokolnikov and Serebryakov
about it.
Vyshinsky: I emphasize once again: precisely in that period,
autumn of 1934, you fully informed them of the contents of the
letter and of your opinions about it?
· Radek: Yes. Of my opinions, which I commµnicated to Trotsky
in a private letter, I did not speak for political reasons. These
1_09

political reasons were that I was one of those who was once the
cause of the most serious break-up of the Trotskyite organization,
and having decided to take part in this work a second time I was
very cautious in expressing my own individual opinions so as
not to give anybody a pretext for saying that no sooner had I·
joined than I began to show discontent. That is why I thought it
proper to tell Trotsky, but not the others.
Vyshinsky: Wh.at, concretely, did you tell them? Something
slightly different to each, but in the main the same?
Radek: I told each one that at a diplomatic reception-I·men-tioned the position of that diplomatic person-I was told so-andso and so-and-so and that I replied so-and-so and so-and-so. Of
course, to those of them "vho 1did not :attend diplomatic receptions
the name of the person meant nolhing. I remember that when in
1935 I personally spoke to Serebryakov an·d asked him whether
Pyatakov had told him anything and whether he knew anything
about 'I.his ma'tter, he said: "Yes, there was talk with :some German, but r .don"'l renH'mher his name." But Sokolnikov must have
remembered.
Vyshinsky: You are not pm·ticularly hee>dful of !he President's
:y.r~ning.

Radek: I apologize, it slipped out in the heat of the moment.
will keep slriclly to instructions.
Vyshinsky: Did you also tell them about the contents of Trotsky's letter?
Radek: l spoke \'Cry distinctly about the contents of Trotsky's
letter.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat questions were raised in it?
Radek: The victory of fascism in Germany. The growth ·of
Japanese aggression. The inevitability of these countries waging
war against the U.S.S.R. The inevitable defeat of the U.S.S.R. The
necessity for the Moc, if it came into power, to make concessions.
Vyshinsky: Excuse me, please. Inevitable defeat: how did
Trotsky and you picture that? And what was your and Trotsky's
:1ttitude towards defeat?
Radel.:: The attitude towards defeat was entirely positive
because it was stated there that this would -create the conditions
for the a•.:cession to power of the bloc, and it e\·en stated more,,
that it was in our interest to hasten war.
Vyshinsky: Henee you were interested in hastening war and lf
was to your interest that the U.S.S.R. should be defeated in this
-war? How was this put in Trotsky's lefter?
Radek: Defeat is inevitable and it will create the conditions for
our accession to ·power, therefore, we were interested in hasteni~g
the war. The conc!usion is: we are interested in defeat.
llQ

Vyshinsky: \Ve are reconstructing the contents of the letter.
Radek: Undoubtedly that was 1.he line of thought. It logically
followed with indisputable clarity. But since I am giving you, the
State Prosecution, evidence, I must draw a clear distinction between the phrase, .as I remember it, and the precise phrase that
was in the letter. But irrespective of whether it was couched in
those terms or not, there is no doubt that this was the line of
thought.
l'yshinsky: I ask you to reply to the question about what was
your and TrotSky's attitude towards_ the defeat of the U.S.S.R.
Radek: If you are asking me about Trotsky's attitude, I have
answered. If you are asking me a!boutmy own, Citizen Procurator,
I must say that in so far as it is a matter of establishing juridical
facts I must give an answer. In so far as it is a matter of my
feelings and my ethics, wh:ich did not affect my action._ . . .
l'yshinsky: I am not interested in feelings, but in facts.
Radek: The fact tlhat 1 gave a visa to Trotsky's mandate ....
i·yshinsky: The point is not that , you gave your visa to
Trotsky's mandate; I am speaking of a fact: the letter which
you received from Trotsky in April 1934-this letter spoke about
war. about this war being inevitable, that in this war the U.S.S.R.,
in Trotsky's opinion, would suffer defeat, that as a result of this
war and delfeat the bloc would come lo power. And now I ask
you: In these circumstances were you for the defeat of the U.S.S.R.
or for the victorv of the U.S.S.R.?
Radek:. At th.at time I considered defeat inevitable and thought
that in the circumstances of defeat we would come to power. If
you are asking me about what I wished . . . -.
l'yshinsky:. But were you for the defeat or for the victory of
thi> U .S.S.R.?
Radek: All my actions during these years testify to the fact
that I aided defeat.
Vysllinsky: These actions of yours were deliberate?
Rndek: Apart from sleeping, I have never in my life committ~d any undeliberate actions.
Vyshinsky: And this, unfortunately, was not a dream?
Radek: Unfortunately this was not a dream.
Vyshinsky: It was reality?
Radel.:: It was sad reality.
Vyshinsky: Yes, it was reality sad for you. You spoke with the
members of the centre about defeatism. Consequently, we can
put it as follows: That the question of .defeat was for you a practical issue.
Radek: The questiop, of defeat was a practical issue for us
at that time.

111

Vyshinsky: This was in April 1934?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsl.y: And you spoke about this to the other members of
the centre?
Radek: If you ask whether we spoke about our attitude
towards defeat, I must say the following .in order to define the
situation: With Sokolnikov there was no exchange of opinions
whatever from thi$ angle. I informed him of the directives and
asked about the specific fact regarding--.
The President: Accused Radek, are you tryiing to provoke us?
Radek: I am not trying to provoke you; this wilrl not occur
again.
Vyshinsky: Such behaviour on the part of the accused Radek
places me in a very difficult position during the course of the
interrogation.
Tlze President: Quite so.
Vyshinsky: And I am afraid that Radek will continue with
such escapades, so that I shall be unable to put questions on this
matter. You are a man sufficiently well versed in politics to understand that ii.fit is forbidden to speak :about certain things in Court,
·this must be accepted as a demand of the law.
Radek: I deeply apologize; this will not occur agai!Il.
The President: I consider that if Radek repeats anything or
this kind, this question will have to be dealt with in camera.
Radek: I repeat that this ·will not occur again.
Vyshinsky: I would ask you to adhere to the factual side of the
matter, then it will be easier for you to do it. You spok_,~ with the
members of ;the centre about .defeatism?
-Radek: \Ve accepted it as something to be carried out. ~>
Vyshinsky: \Vere any practical steps taken by you personally
and by your accomplices to put these instructions into effect?
Radek: \Ve took action, of course.
Vyshinsky: But this was connected not only with the letteii·
but also with all further directives'?
Radek: \:Ve did not retreat from the defeatist platform, we
continued to be in agreement-this was up to the moment of our
arrest; but since 1936, after the second directive of Trotskv,
certain changes became noticeable which unfortunately did not
lead to any result.
Vysliinsky: \Ve will speak of that 1larter on. At present I am
interested in the period from April 1934 up to the end of the
autumn of 1934. Were Pyatakov, Serebryakov and Sokolnikov
informed about Trotsky's letter?
Radek: Yes.
T lie President: It is proposed that the interrogation of the
112

accused Serebryakov, Sokolnikov and :Pyatakov be held after the
adjournment.
·
Vyshinsky: I will be very brief. (To Pyatakov.) Do you confirm that you were informed about Trotsky's letter to Radek?
Pyatakov: I testified to this effect yesterday and hereby confirm that this is in full accordance with the facts.
Vyshinsky (to Sokolnikov): I put the same question to you.
Sokolnikov: I am also informed about it.
Vyshinsky: You also shared this standpoint?
Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky (to Serehryakov): You also shared th.is standpoint
of defeatism?
·
Serebryakov: I did not object.
Vyshinsky: You said that there was a second! letter in December 1935·. Tell us about it
Radek: I received this letter at the beginning of December.
This time it was not a political communication any more, eveJ).
if of a certain fundamental programmatic significance, but represented· a draft program of this second variant.
Vyshinsky: Since we heard about this yesterday, I do not think
that the Court would object either. You must tell us the main point.
Radek: The main point, in the first place, was the international
perspective. It was that the victory of German fascism had ushered
in a period of the fascization of Europe and the victory of fascism
in other countries, the defeat of the working class and the absence
.of revolutionary perspectives until there was some radical change
such as might be caused by an international war. That is the first
thing. As far as the second is concerned, the main thing is that
two alternative possibilities were contemplated.
Vyshinsky: That was mentioned yesterday.
Radek: The first was one which he regarded as impracticable-that of coming to power without a war.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, without a defeat?
Radek: Consequently the practicable plan remained that of
'Coming to power as a result of a defeat. And this coming to power
.as a result of a defeat signified for him that while up to that time
Trotsky abroad and we here, in Moscow, had spoken of an economic retreat within the framework of the Soviet state, a radical
-change was indicated in this letter. For, in the first place, Trofsky
considered that as a result of the defeat there would arise the inevitability of making territorial concessions, and he specifically
mentioned the Ukraine. In the -second place, it was a question of
the partition of the U.S.S.R. In the third place, from the economic
-standpoint, he foresaw the following consequences of the defeat:
not only the granting of concessions on industrial enterprises of
113

importance to capitalist states, but also the transfer, the sale to
private capitalist owners, of important economic enterprises to be
specified by them. Trotsky contemplated the issue of debenture
loans, i.e., the a<lmission of foreign capital for the exploitation of
t!iose factories which would formally remain in the hands of the
Soviet state.
·
In the sphere of agrarian policy, he quite clearly stated that
the collective farms would have to be disbanded, and advanced
the idea of giving tractors and other complex agricultural
machinery to individual peasants in order to revive a new kulak.
stratum. Lastly, it was quite openly stated that private capital
would have to be revived in the cities. It was clear that it meant
the restoration of capitalism.
In the sphere of politics, a new note in this letter was the way
it posed the question of power. In this letter Trotsky said: There
can be no talk of any kind of democracy. The working class has
lived through eighteen years of revolution, and it has vast appetites; and this working class will have to be sent back partly
to privately-owned factories and partly to state-owned factories.
which will have to compete with foreign capital under most difficult conditions. That means that the living standard of the working
class will be drastically lowered. In the countryside the struggle of
the poor and middle peasants against the kulaks will be renewed.
And then, in order to hold power, we shall need a strong government, irrespective of what forms are employed to veil it.
If you want historical analogies, take that of the government
of Napole-0n I and think over this analogy. Napoleon L was not
restoration-the restoration came later, but it was an aftemp! to
preserve the principal gains of the revolution, to preserve wfiat
could be preserved from the revolution. This was something new.
He realized that the master of the situation, with whose aid the
bloc could come to power, would be fascism-on the one hand
German fascism and on the other hand the military fascism of'
another, Far Ea.stern country. ·
And as regards practical conclusions, the new .factor here
was that this acfrdty-meaning wrecking activity-would have to·
be specially agreed upon with that partner with whose help alone
the bloc could come to power.
Finally, the new feature was-although this, far fro_m __ being
the essence of the matter, was only camouflage--that we were con~­
fronted with the prns.pect of having to accept everything, but if we
remained alive and in power, then owing to the victory of these
two countries, and as a result of tiheir plunder and profit a conflict would arise between .them and the others, and this would
lead fo our new development, our "revanche." But this was a
114

prospect from the realm of fiction. Such is the substance of this
first directive.
.
·
There was one other very important point in these <lirecth-es, namely, the formula that we would inevitably have to bring
the social structure _of the U.S.S.R. into line with the victorious
fascist countries if we wanted to keep in power at all. It was this
idea -0f bringing into line--a pseudonym for the restoration of
capitalism which immediately struck us as something specifically
new when we received these diredives.
Vyshinsky: So if we briefly sum up the contents of this letter,
what are the main points?
·
.
.
Radek: We continued to maintain ·our stand of 1934 that defeat
was inevitable.
Vyshinsky: And what was the conclusion you drew from this?
Radek: The conclusion to be drawn from this inev:itable defeat
was that now the problem of restoring capitalism was openly set
before us.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, this restoration of capitalism, which
Trotsky called bringing the social structure of the U.S.S.R. into
line with the capitalist countries, was conceived as an inevitable
result of an agreement with foreign states?
Radek: As an inevitable result of the defeat of the U.S.S.R., of
the social consequences of this defeat and of an agreement on the
basis. of this defeat.
Vyshinsky: Further?
Radek: The third condition was the most novel of all for usthat of replacing the Soviet power by what he called a Bonapartis.t
government. And it was clear to us that this meant fascism without its own finance ca'Pital, serving foreign finance capital.
Vyshinsky: The fourth -condition?
Radek: The fourth was the partition of the country. It was
planned to surrender the Ukraine to Germany and the Maritime
Province and the Amur region to Japan.
Vyshinsky: ·was there any talk at that ti.me about any other
economic conoessions?
Radek: Yes, those decisions a'bout which I have already spoken
were further amplified. The payment of indemnities in the form
of supplies of food, raw materials and fats extending over a long
period of years. Then-at first he said this without giving .figures
but afterwards in more definite form-a certain percentage of
participation in Soviet imports to be guaranteed to the victorious
countries. All this -together meant the complete enslavement of
the country.
,
Vyshinsky: Was there talk abo-p.t Sakhalin oil?
Radek: As regards Japan, we were told she must not only be
:115

given Sakhalin oil but be guaranteed oil in the event of a war with
the U.S.A. It was stated that no. obstacles must be raised to the
conquest of China by Japanese imperialism.
Vyshinsky: And as regards the Danube countries?
Radek: As regards the Danube and Balkan countries, Trotsky
said in his letter that German fascism was expanding and we
should do nothing to prevent this. The point was, of course, to
sever any of our relations with Czechoslovakia which would have
contributed to the defence of that country.
_
Vyshinsky: Did these six conditions cover the whole contents
of this letter of 1935?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I think you spoke abO'l.Lt a more intensive form of
various wrecking activities.
Radek: He did not give any specific instructions on this score,
but he pointed out that war was approaching and said that even if
the -countries concerned could give us any assurance that they
will recognize our bloc, this would still be only a scrap of paper
unless the bloc was strong, and the strength of the bloc would be
measured by its terrorist actions, by its wrecking acts and by
the role it played in the army in the event of war. This letter
contained instruciions on the necessity of spreading and intensifying wrecking, terrorist and diversive activities.
These activities were in line with the whole program, and
they were referred to as one of the main levers in coming to
power. In connection with war it was pointed out that the Trotskyites must undermine the organizalion and the <liscipli® of the
army.
~>.
Vysliinsky: \Vas there no talk about these diversive acts in
connection with war and with the defeat of the U.S.S.R.?
Radek: It was stated quite definitely that they would believe
in our strength in proportion to the help we gave them.
Vyshinsky: And what was this help to consist of?
Radek: This help was to consist of wrecking and of developing
terrorist activities, coupled with the undermining of the morale
of the army by the Trotskyites.
Vyshinsky: And was anything said about the defence industry?
Radek: A special point was made of this. The diversive
acliviVes of the Trotskyites in the war industry were to--be agreed.upon with those partners with whom we would succeed in reaching an agreement-that is to say, with the general staffs of the
foreign states involved.
Vyshinsky: To agree with the general staffs of the countries
concnned unon a plan of acts of diversion?
Radek: Yes.

Vyshinsky: How was this plan conceived-in a general way or
concretely?
Radek: There directives were quite ,general, which was connected .with a certain resistance they met from Moscow. Clearly,
this was not a matter of second-rate importance, which one <'ould
choose or reject at will; it was the thing for which they would
give everything.
Vyshinsky: Yesterday we disclosed what Pyatakov said to
Sokolnikov about setting fire to the Kemerovo Combined Chemical
\Vorks in the event of -war. \Vere these instructions of Pyatakov's
to Norkin in line with this letter?
Radek.: I do not know what impeijed Pyatakov to have that
conversation, but there can be no doUbt that such instructions were
given even earlier by those directing wrecking activities, that they
fully conformed with the spirit of this letter and the demands it
contained.
Vyshinsky (to· Pyatakov) : Accused Pyatakov, when you gave
Norkin instructions on setting fire to the Kemerovo Chemical
\Vorks in the event of war, ~were you guided by any general
policy?
·
Pyatakov: I was guided by that line of "concretization" which
was given by Trotsky.
.
Vgshinsky: And your conversations with Sokolnikov took
place after your return from Berlin in 1935, after your personal
meeting with Trotsky?
Pyatakov: After.
Vyshinsky: And were these demands formulated during your
personal meeting with Trotsky?
Pyatakov: Certainly.
Vyshinsky (to Radek): Was there no talk about railway trans-port?
.
Radek: The whole point of "concretization" conoerned war,
so that transport could not be an exception.
Vyshinsky: Accused Serebryakov, you remember your talk
w:ith Radek about Trotsky's letter in 1935?
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did Radek link up Trotsky's directives with your
criminal activities in the sphere of transport?
Serebryakov: It was, naturally, linked up in my mind. As
early as 1934, and in December 1935 when Llvshitz and I exchanged views, LivshHz being at that time Assistant People's
Commissar of Railways, we said that at a certain period the questions of. intensifying diversive and wrecking work in transport
. might arise.
Vyshinsky: You spoke with Livshitz?
117

Serebryakou: Yes. At that time we assumed that it would be
possible to overload, to block up the most important junctions
with a view lo interrupting freight traffic.
Vyshinsky: And as regards the organization of diversive acts?.
Serebryakou: The way the question was put was that we must
speed up the recruiting of forces for diversive acts.
·
Vyshinsky: Accused Livshitz, what have you to say about
this?
Liushitz: I confirm. thrat we ta'lked about speeding up th_e
recruiting of members of the organization for acts of diversion
and for carrying out acts of wrecking during war time.
Vyshinsky: You were Assistant People's Commissar of Railways and yet at the same time discussed the question of how to
obstruct traffic on the railways in the event of war?
Livshitz: Yes. I considered that since we were carrying on a
struggle for the coming to power of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
bloc, it was necessary to do this.
Vyshinsky: So these preparations were in line with the whole
struggle of your bloc for power?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you had a special talk about this with Serebryakov?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And with Pyatakov?
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: But <lid you not see Pyatak.ov at that time?
Livshitz. Yes.
'°'"·
Vyshinsky: Surely you must have spoken with Pyatakov abo_:tlt
the tasks of the bloc?
Livshitz: He and I did not talk about such questions.
Vyshinskg: What did you talk about then?
Livshitz: We talked about the work which the Trotskyites
were doing on the railways in general.
Vyshinsky: Namely?
Livshitz: About preventing the carrying out of orders which
would ensure an improvement in the work of the railways.
Vyshinsky: What did you talk about with Pyatakov?
Livshitz: About the work which the Trotskyites were doing
in the transport system, i.e., about sabotaging those orders which
would ensure an improvement in the work of railways.
Vyshinsky: Did Pyatakov give you direct instructions and direeHvies to intensify wrecking and diversive work on the railways?
Livshitz: He did.
Vyshinsky: You accepted them?
Livshitz: Yes.
118

Vyshinsky: Carried them out?
Livshitz: Yes, what I could I carried out.
Vyshinsky: You carried on wrecking activities?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Disrupted the work?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky (to Radek): \Vhat was lhe gist of Trotsky's program in 1935?
Radek: In 1935 the ques.tion :was raised of going back to capitalism.
Vyshinsky: To what limits?
Radek: What Trotsky proposed, was without any limits. To
such limits as the enemy might require.
Vyshinsky: So, again, defeat was on the order of the day?
Radek: Yes, the new feature now was that defeat was linked
up with foreign instructions ..
Vyshinsky: That is to say, there was now a direct arrangement
with foreign general staffs-and this was not the case before?
Radek: This was not the case before.
· Vyshinsky: This made you stop and think?
Radek: What most made me stop and think was not only this,
but the difference between the situation that had existed in the
country previously, in 1934, and afterwards.
Vyshinsky: Pyatakov to1d you about his visit to Oslo?
Radek: Pyatakov's visit was decided on after we had conferred
together. We had come to the conclusion that I ought to take advantage of the fact that I had on three occasions been invited to
go to Oslo and deliver a lecture to students. If Pyatakov had not
been sent abroad on business, I, having .permission to do so, would
have gone to Oslo to deliver this lecture and would certainly have
gone to see Trotsky.
Vyshimky: So you were supposed to go abroad?
· Radek: Either I or Pyatakov. I mu.st speak of the aim of this
journey, which was not very clearly brought out by Pyatakov
yesterday. Why did I propose this and why did he immediately
agree that it was necessary to visit Trotsky? He supported it by
:saying that the man had completely lost all sense of reality and
was selling us tasks whkh we were unable to carry out, irrespective of what our attitude to them was, and it had become necessary
to go to see him at all costs and talk things over with him. This
was how Pyatakov explained his proposal. I did not give any explanation of why I urged this visit and considered it necessary. But
I must admit that I did not for one moment believe those motives
which Pyatakov put forward.
Vyshinsky: Why?
119

Rodek: For the simple reason that Pyatakov knows Trotsky
far too well to think for one moment that Trotsky would ever
admit, under the influence of his arguments, that he did not
know the basic elements of the situation; and as to risk one's
neck in order to achieve a five per cent reduction in baseness
was not worth while, therefore I could not take Pyatakov's explanations seriously and thought that he probably had the same
;motives as myself, and my motives were very simple. After I
read these directives, I thought over them at night, and came to
Pyatakov only on the following day; it was clear to me th-at
although the directives contained all the elements which had
formerly been present, yet these elements had now so matured
;that to accept these directives meant, in the first place, that in
order to carry them out I should have to inform a comparatively
wide circle of people; because I had to set tasks to the organizers,
and these tasks were considerably widened. I had to inform
them about the matter and let them know how I myself regarded these directives, and I was personally convinced, when
I closed my eyes and thought about the people in question, that
a number of the most important persons, those who had sD.nned
most deeply from the point of view of the Criminal Code, would
not only fail to understand these directives but that they would
respond to them by severing their connection. I did not think
for a minute that Muralov would agree to a policy of supporting
;lhe partition of the U.S.S.R. Nor could I .conceive this to be true
of a dozen other persons with whom I was personally acquainted.
I will not mention names here, lest I should appear in t.Re role of
.counsel for defence, which they have refused, because rhave.._no
;warrant from them to do this, but for me, as a politician, it was
dear that this program was breaking up the bloc; in accordance
with this program they were indulging in wrecking activities, terrorism and similar things which undermined the power of the Sov-.
iet Union. But to come and to say that this had to be done in ordef
to obtain power and to become police sergeant, as a result and to
establish capitalism in the country-this, I was firmly eonvinced.
meant the collapse and death of the bloc. Accordingly, when confronted with the question what I had done and of going to people
in .order to tell them what they had to do, it was perfectly clear
that if I came to Pyatakov, being convinced that he would bring_
still more rigorom. directives-then, naturally, the question would
. arise that our activities had brought us to a point where we
might be asked to betray the country with the aim of restoring
capitalism and of making the country a colony. We <lecided for
ourselws that as regards that formula which had become untenable for the four-that we could not take responsibility for
120

this formula, that we could not bear responsibility for thes~
directives, that we could not lead people blindly, could not cause
Soviet Red Army men to be shot down. \Ve decided to call a
conference. Pyatakov went to see Trotsky; I don't know why
Pyatakov did not speak about this here, for it was perhaps the
most vital point in his conversation with Trotsky-when Trotsky
said that a conference meant exposure or a split. Now Pyatakov
came back and told about his conversation with Trotsky. Then
and there we decided that we would call a conference, despite
Trotsky's ban. I talked it over with Serebryakov, and Serebryakov agreed to it, and Sokolnikov, who kept silent and tried to
take the attitude of scrupulously obeying instructions, said that
since this conference was inevitable it would have to be held.
We agreed how to organize this conference, agreed upon a number of persons whom wie would invite, and upon who was to get
in touch with which group.
As far as I am concerned, this was my last talk with Pyata:kov
and with Serebryakov and witih G. Y .. Sokolnikov.
In connection with this it was precisely these measures that
I took: lo get Dreitzer to come to Moscow at all costs-I will
tell why-it is perhaps the most important thing in this case;
to get in touch with the people in Rostov through Preobrazhensky
and get them to come to Moscow. In doing this, I did not tell
these people what was on foot, but that there was to be a con·
ference at which we would adopt a most vital decision for us, and
that it was absolutely necessary that they come.
And this was the moment which for all of us, inwardly, had
this meaning: we had reached- a barrier.
Did we interrupt our activities after receiving the directives?
;s-o. The machine went on working. We did not accept the direc. tives, but neither did we reject them. Accordingly, in so far as the
old directives were concerned, the machine went on workingparticularly since we had concealed the idea of a conference from
our men. In doing this I was guided by quite definite considerations
of a tactical, practical character, and I concealed it to such an extent--concealed the contents of these directives, that is-that
when Bukharin met me in January and asked me during the course
of our conversation what news there was and so forth, I, who on
all other occasions had informed him of all Trotskyite directives,
had informed him fully--did not tell him about these directives,
told him about other letters, sent earlier, which had come.
And so, Citizen Procurator, I want to say the following:
Did we interrupt our activities? No. Up to the moment of arrest each of us did what he could. The fact that I was destined to
121

do very little during these months, is not my merit. If, let us say,
that same Prigozhin had come to me (he was already arrested at
that ti:me and did not come to me) and had asked me: "Sha!ll we
continue our activities?" I wouid have said: "Yes, continue them."
If Friedland had ~ome to me, I would have told him too: "Continue them."
But I none the less maintain that there is a new factm here
about which I shall perhaps have to give you specific answers later
on, and that this factor existed not only for me but for all _the
others who knew these directives: these directives were the limit.
Vyshinsky: Three facts: the April letter of 1934, the December
letter o.f 1935 and Pyatakov's meeting with Trotsky in December
1935. How was the question put in Trotsky's letter in 1934? War,
working for defeat?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: A return to capitalism in substance?
Radek: No, a return to capitalism is not raised in the letter
of 1934.
Vyshinsky: No? What then?
Radek: A retreat which we then thought.
Vyshinsky: To where?
Radek: To the positions of the NEP, with industry strengthened
in comparison with what it had been before 1928.
Vyshinsky: A retreat towards strengthening what elements?
Radek: A retreat which was to restore a part of the capitalist
elements as well, but this retreat, if compared with the state of
things in 1927-there would be a possibility during thi#;-etreat, on
the one hand, of admitting capitalist restoration, but at the-:s-ame
time of strengthening industry, thanks to the First Five-Year Pilan,
the state farms and part of the collective farms-that is to say, we
would have an economic base on which in my opinion a. proletarian
government could have maintained itself.
1.
Vyshinsky: So a proletarian government could still have mafotained itself? But the tendency was to go backward?
Radek: The tendency was to go backward.
Vyshinsky: In 1935 this stood out more dearly in comparison
with 1934?
Radek: In 1935 the question was raised of going back to ca:pita1ism.
-·- - ·-· ·
Vyshinsky: To \Vhat limits?
Radek: What Trotsky proposed was without any limits. To such
limits as the enemy might require.
Vyshinsky: So, again, defeat was orr the order of the day?
Radek: Yes. The new feature now was that <lefeat was linked
up with foreign instructions.
122

Vyshinsky: This new feature was accepted?
Radek: In the first plaoe, allow me to answer the question aibout
defeat.
·
Vyshinsky: \Vhat was the new feature?
Radek: The new feature was in the way the question of this
defeat was put.
Vyshinsky: This was something new in comparison with 1934?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And in comparison with Pyatakov's conversation?
Radek: The conversation tallies with the directives; it merely
aggravates them.
Vyshinsky: So there is no difference between the letter in 1934
and the conversation in 1935?
Radek: There is no difference whatever; it is all one whole.
Vyshinsky: All one whole, and in this wholie, defeat comes first?
Radek: Our attitude towards defeat was not due to the fact that
we had become better or worse, but to objective reasons--after all,
the situation in 1935 was quite different from that in 1934 ..
Vyshinsky: Wie have cleared up that point.
Radek: That pOint has not been cleared up, Citizen Procurator.
Vyshinsky: I will now pass on to your attitude towards the letter in 1934 and the conversation in 1935. Was there any difference1
Radek: There was no difference whatever. There was one new
point: concentratiun.
Vyshinsky: On the question of partitioning the U.S.S.R. there
was also no difference between the conversation and the letter?
Radek: No, no difference.
Vyshinsky: On the question of territorial concessions-'--just the
same?
· Radek: Just the same.
Vyshinsky: On the question of terrorist activities-no difference
here either?
Radek: No.
Vyshinsky: What then was the new feature?
Radek: The new feature was that it was now linked up with
foreign instructions.
Vyshinsky: So that is the difference? That is to say, we have
here a direct arrangement with foreign general staffs-and was not
this the case before?
·
Radek: That was not the case before.
Vyshinsky: That made you stop and think?
Radek: It was not that which made me stop and think as much
as the situation that existed in the country before, in 1934, and
after. It was this that made me stop and think. After all, we were
not born in order to help the fascists defeat the Soviet Union. In
123

1934 we considered that defeat was inevitable. We proceeded from
an overestimation of the difficulties in the countryside. In industry
we considered that there was a transitional period, when even the
newly-built factories were only just being put into operation. The
position on the railways was at that time considered to be catastrophic. But now, toward!> the end of 1935, could we consider
that the situation on the railways was catastrophic? Why, Pyatakov, Livshitz (we had information from Livshitz)-we all knew
of the tremendous work which the railways had accomplished
under Kaganovich's direction. I personally, in connection with my
official business, knew of the opinion held of our railways by
foreign intelligence services, who considered that our railways
were prepared for war. Could I, towards the end of 1935, on the
basis of what the Trotskyites told me, consider that our industry
was doomed in the event of war? I know what industrial mobilization means, I know the difficulties of every industry, I know the
difficulties of our industry; but I also knew that everything required for the prosecution of war would be supplied. In the case
of agriculture I myself did not have a wide field of observation:
every year I went to the same collective farms, in the Kursk Gubernia, and I saw that these collective farms, which I had been
observing from year to year, in 1935 represented something incomparable, something absolutely different from what they were
in 1933. And so, if in 1933 or 1934 we proceedeq from the assumption that defeat was inevitable, and considered it necessary to assist this fact, so as to get something out of it, we now saw that
the idiea of the destruction of the U.S.S.R. by \Vestern fascism
and by the military-fascist circles in the East, which TJQtsky
took as his starting point-was now, from the standpoint of objective reality a fantasy, that all the conditions for victory existed.
And so, in connection with this the question was bound to arise
with us: in order that we might come to power-let the country
be defeated. In 1934 we took defeat as our starting point, as ifa
necessary fact. But in 1935 every one of us was bound to say to
himself-if you are ready to do that you are thwarting a possible
victory, which is already assured, even if against you. While in
1933 and 1934 we considered economic retreat as something
necessitated by circumstances, as something essential for the
country, and not only in order that we might come tQ_po::ver,. we
now saw that the country had emerged from its chief difficulties
and that the Five-Year Plan had succeeded, not only in the fact
that it had built factories, but because it had become a live reality.
Vyshinsky: And what was the conclusion?
Radek: And therefore the conclusion: restoration of capitalism in the circumstances of 1935. For nothing at all, just for
124

the sake of Trotsky's beautiful eyes-the country was to return to capitalism. When I read this I felt as if it were a madhouse.
And, lastly, and this is no unimportant fact, formerly the posi- lion was that we were fighting for power because we were convinced that we could secure something to the country. Now we
were to fight in order that foreign capital might' rule, which
would put us completely under its control before it allowed us
to come to power. What did the directive to agree upon wrecking
activities with foreign circles mean? For me this directive meant
something very simple, something very comprehensible to me as
a political organizer, namely that agents of foreigµ powers were
becoming wedged in our organization, that our organization was
becoming the direct representative of foreign intelligence services.
We ceased to be in the slightest degree the masters of our actions.
We bad put up with Trotsky when he gave us directives from
abroad, but in this case we were to become the agency of foreign
fascist states.
This denoted in practice that if such men as Yakov Livshitz
or Serebryakov, with decades of revolutionary work behind them,
could descend to wrecking, now their moral fibre would have to
be utterly broken, and they would act on the instructions of the
class enemy. Either they would lose their bearings, or they would
become spies. If they lost their bearings, I could do nothip.g with
them; if they became agents of foreign states, others would give
them their orders. As a result, if foreign fascism came in, this
fascism, far from letting Trotskyites get into power-they are of
no use to it-would destroy the organization because it had no
need to trouble itself with this crowd of anarchist intellectuals.
So that even if my attitude to the country did not weigh with me,
there was pure egoism. The leader of the organization told m£
that for the sake of power, for the phantom of power, Trotsky
was ready to sacrifice the last man capable of dying for .him,
and I could not demand this of people who had been my
associates for fifteen years. I therefore had to ask myself: what
was I to do?
Vyshinsky: What did you decide?
Radek: The first step to take would be to go to the Central
Committee of the Party, to make a statement, to name all the persons. This I did not do. It was not I that went to the G.P.U., but
the G.P.U. that came for me.
Vyshinsky: An ~loquent reply.
Radek: A sad reply.
Vyshinsky: For what purpose did you decide to call a conference? Was it in connection with the sentiments alleg~dly
evoked in you by the monstrosity of the crimes, which allegedly
125

fully revealed thems~lves and induced you to stop and think
you should assume the responsibility, and how to assume it?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You decided not to take this responsibility?
Radek: I came to the firm decision not to take this responsibility.
Vyshinsky. You decided not to commit these crimes?
Radek: Not to commit these crimes.
Vyshinsky: To break with all this?
Radek: I had the idea of calling a conference. The conference
would disclose the attitude of all to these things~ that .is, some
would say, "We will not do this," others would say, "\Ve will do
this."
Vyshinsky: And then what?
Radek: And then, when those who were jointly committing a
erime begin to fight among themselves, the authorities whose duty
it is to fight them would lay hands on the whole affair. I was convinced that the denouement would take place in the G.P.U., but
I was not the one to organize it.
Vyshinsky: But there was a short cut to this?
Radek: But the short cut is not always the easiest way, and
not everybody is capable of taking the shortest cut. And this
w.as not the ·shortest cut for another reason: I was convinced
that the authorities must and would differentiate between us. We,
the leaders, bear full and final responsibility, but I was convinced that if some of our subordinates changed their minds and
decided to lav down their anns, the attitude toward them would
be different. And I considered that by pladng these quesffons before them I would give them the opportunity of deciding I-OT ·
themselves. And in this connection I must say what I have not
yet spoken about; I want to speak about the role of Dreitzer, why
we made these things so secret, and so forth.
Vyshinsky: You \Vill tell us about this later. You are now descdbing all those mental perplexities and vaoillations which made
you think it necessary to summon a conferenoe. \Vhat was the
cause of this perplexity and these vacillations?
Radek: The realization that this directive was a directive
to commit treason against the socialist fatherland, which might ,
be victori6us in a war, and to assist foreign capital in restoring
capitalism in Russia, which restoration was not dictatoo ny
objective necessity.
Vyshinsky: That means that t'he- following conclusion may be
drawn: as long as you assumed that socialism in our country
was feeble, you considered treachery permissible, that it was permissible to work for war, that it was permissible to wonk for the
wheth~r

anr

126

defeat of the Soviet Union, and so on. But when. you •saw that
socialism was sufficiently powerful and strong, you dedded that
neither war nor defeat were possible.
Radek: You are a profound reader of human hearts, but I
must nevertheless comment on my thoughts in my own words.
Vyshinsky: I know that you have a fairly good c;tock of words
behind which to conceal your thoughts, and it is very difficult for
a man, even a good reader of human hearts, to understand you and
induce you to say what you are really thinking. But I would ask
you not to reason here so much as a journalist who has specialized in international affairs, but as a man accused of treason.
And it is from this standpoint that I ask you the question: were
you in favour of defeat in 1934?
Radek: I have a'lready answered that question.
Vyshinsky: Repeat it once mor.e, if you_ don't mind.
Radek: In 1934 I considered defeat inevitable.
Vyshinsky: Were you in favour of defeat in 1934?
Radek: I considered defeat inevitable.
Vyshinsky: \Vere you in favour of defeat?
Radek: If I could avert defeat, I would be against defeat.
\Tyshinsky: You consider that you could not have averted it?
Radek: I considered it an inevitable fact
Vyshinsky: You are answering my question incorrectly. Did
you accept the whole of Trotsky's line given to you in 1934?
· ·- Radek: I accepted the whole of Trotsky's line in 1934.
Vyshinsky: Was defeat part of it?
Radek: Yes, it was a line of defeat.
Vyshinsky: Trotsky's line included defeat?
Radek: Yes.
·
Vyshinsky: Did you accept it?
Radek: I did.
Vyshinsky: Hence, since you aocepted it you were in favour
of defeat?
Radek: From the standpoint. . . .
Vyshinsky: You headed for defeat?
Radek: Yes, of course.
Vyshinskg: That is, you were in favour of defeat?
Radek: Of course, if I say yes, that means we headed for it.
Vyshinsky: Which of us then is putting the question rightly?
Radek: All the same, I think that you are not putting the
question rightly.
Vyshinsky: In 1934 you were not against defeat, but in favour
of defeat?·
Radek: Yes, I have said so.
Vyshinsky: I want you to repeat it once more.

127

Radek: As you please, you are the State Prosecutor and may
demand that I repeat it ten times.
Vyslzinsky: It will be enough for me if you repeat it once
clearly. In 1934-in favour of <lefeat, in 1935-the question of
defeat is raised. . . .
·
Radek: It was raised in the December letter.
Vyshinsky: Did you accept it?
Radek: No. .
Vyshinsky: Why?
Radek: Because in 1934 I considered defeat inevitable, whereas in 1935 I considered that the country had every ground to be
victorious and therefore. . . .
Vyshinsky: In 1934 you considered defeat inevitable. \Vhy?
Radek: I considered that the country could not defend itself.
Vyshinsky: That is, you considered that it was weak?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is, you proceeded from the weakness of the
country?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is; proceeding from the assumed weakness
of the country, you accepted defeat?
Radek: I considered it inevitable and accepted it.
Vyshinsky: And in 1935 you saw the country was strong and
that this would not come true?
Radek: Not that defeat would not come true, but that it would
not happen, that this was an umeal program, and therefore I was
against the program, which was based on unreal foun~tions.
Vyshinsky: Was it because it was 'unreal that you ~.yere
against it?
- -Radek: I will not speak of other motives.
Vyshinsky: Is it correct to say that in 1935 you were opposed
to a program of defeat because you considered it unreal?
Radek: Yes.
r
Vyshinsky: That means that in 1934 you considered it real
and were in favour of it, but in 1935 you considered it unreal and
were opposed to it?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That was all my question amounted to.
,·
In 1935, after Pyatakov's meeting .with Trotsky, about wP.i_s_
you learned in January 1936, you were disturbed by the too frank
way in which the question of becoming an appendage of fascism
was put?
Radek: Not by the too frank way in which it was put, but by
the fact itself.
Vyshinsky: Was it that which disturbed you?
128

Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And! you did not accept it?
Radek: No.
l'yshinskg: You said that this was ailready a proposal for direct
treason against the country?
.
Radek: There was treason in the first case and in the other.
Vyshinsky: You said that the way the question was put by
Trotsky in De<:ember 1935 in the .conversation with Pyatakov and
in the letter amounted to a proposal for treason against the country?
Radek: Yes.
·
Vyshinsky: Your conversation in November 1934 with this
Mr. - - of one of the Oentral European states if I am not mistaken was. . . ?
Radek: About treason against the country.
Vyshinsky: You accepted this? And you held this conversation?
Radek: You have learned. it from me, that means th.at I did
hold it.
Vyshinsky: What was this, treason against the country?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And did it not disturb you?
Radek: It goes without saying. Of course, it disturbed me. Do
you think I have trained myself for treason against the country?
It disturbed me very profoundly.
Vyshinsky: But you continued to adhere to the position of
defeat?
Radek: Yes, my position was one of carrying out Trotsky's
directive.
·
Vyshinsky: Even though. this directive meant treason against
· the country?
· Radek: Yes .
.._ -, Vyshinsky: That is, in orie case it was treason against the
country, and in 1935 also?
r am now interested in knowing what distinction you were
making here on the question of treason against the C()untry-not
quantitatively, but. qualitatively.
·
Radek: You have already drawn the conclusion, Citizen Procurator.
.
Vyshinsky: You admit that the fact of the conversation with
~ :Mr. - - in November 1934 Was treasc>n against the country?
...
Radek: I realized this at the time of the conversation ·and
~~characterize it now as I did then.
fi Vyshinsky: As treason?
Radek: Yes.
·,.:.·. Vyshinsky: And the fact that Pyahlov brought ·you the 'directive, waJS that treason too against the country?
·
·

..
I
.

••

.

129

Radek: That was also treason against the country. What is the
difference, perhaps it was treason against the country, perhaps it
was not. A man may be capable of one thing and may not be
capable of the other.
Vysliinsky: Did you commit treason against the country?
Radek: I did not want to betray my country, or to betray it
·completely.
Vyshinsky: You con.sider that to betray is one thing, and to
!betray completely or not completely is another?
Radek: I must add here that when I realized it I did not want
to admit it.
Vyshinsky: Allow me to remind you af your testimony (Vol.
V, page 119). Do you confirm this testimony?
Radek: I confinn it, even in full.
Vyshinsky: Do you confirm your testimony to the effect that
you told Mr.-- that to expect concessions from the present
government was useless?
·
Radek: Such was the gist of my testimony.
Vyshinsky: Do yO'U confirm it?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And that the - - government could count on concessions from the "realist politicians" in the U.S.S.R.?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You told Mr. - - that ihe bloc could consent to
such concessions?
Radek: Yes, we confirmed Trotsky's mandate to negotiate as
to what these concessions should be.
""·
Vyshinsky: I ask you, did you in the name of the bloc promi~.
Mr. - - .real concessions, or. not?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Real concessions? Those concessions were to be
real, it must be presumed?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, concessions of real things?
Radek: Yes, yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vas it a question of territorial concessions as you
conceived it?
Radek: But without knowing then whether they ·would be
necessary. These negotiations had only begun.
Vyshinsky: Did you think about what Mr. K-- regarded as
real concessioni.s?
. Radek: I thought of the fact that I did not know at what stage
there would be war, when there would be war, why, what concessions would have to· be made, what particular concessions, what
the plan would be.
130

Vgshinsky: Nevertheless, these were to be concessions of something real? Docs that include territory?
Radek: It may include, but not necessarily includes.
Vyshinsky: Is that treason?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Is that treason?
Radek: It is treason, of course.
Vyshinsky: The whole question amounts to this: You thought
that, having committed treason once, that was enough, and that
you would not necessarily be committing treason all your life.
And so the moment arrived when you decided not to commit treason. Have I understood you right? ·
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And what did you do to carry this line into effect?
Radck: I have already said what I did.
Vys!iinsky: Briefly.
Radek: I was creating coil'ditions that would stop others froin
committing treason.
Vyshinsky: You wanted to summon a conference to persuade people not to commit treason any more?
Radek: People would change their views-those who would
listen to me--and we would then decide what to do next.
Vyshinsky: And what else?
Radek: To decide what to do next.
Vyshinsky: You knew what would be done?
Radek: I knew what I intended to do .
. Fyshinsky: And what would you have proposed?
Radek: To go to the Central Committee and tell.
l/yshinsky: Did you count on that?
Radek: Yes, I was convinced that a number would agree to it.
Fysllinsky: But you did not want to go alone?
Radek: As I was one of the leaders who was not deciding his
own personal problem but the problem of those who had entnrsted
him with !he leadership.
l'yslzinsky: But in that case there is one other question that is
not dear to me, probably the last in this morning's interrogation.
You received a letter from Trotsky in 1934; you received a letter
from Trotsky in 1935; Pyatakov had a conversation with Trotsky
and brought a personal communication on thiS subjecl. This
treasonable activity, this treasonable line was clear to yoLL Did
you in any degree reduce your political, counter-revolutionary,
criminal, anti-Soviet activity?
Radek: In 1936?
Vyshinsky: In 1935 and 1936.
131

Radek: In 1935 and 1934?
Vyshinsky: l:Q. 1935 and 1936.
Raclek: In 1935 I was a leader who was conducting al~ the
work.
Vyshinsky: And in 1936?
Radek: In 1936 I did nothing to undo what had been done until
then, but I <lid not take any further steps, especially as regards
carrying out this directive, on going deeper into this.
Vyshinsky: That is, ·in 1936 you took no stepo to carry out this
directive?
-· ·
Radek: No.
Vyshinsky: Djd you take any steps .to uncfu the work which
had been <lone until then?
Radek: No.
Vyshinsky: Not by your conference?
Radek: No, because I had not seen a single member of the bloc
ever .since March. In January I had seen Pyatakov.
I was inactive at that period; I did not undo anything. I
was a member of the centre until the time of my arresL If people
'had come to me at that time for instrudions, I would have told
them what directives I had received but I wollld have said: "Go
home and wait." But J engaged in no activities in 1936.
Vyshinsky: Very well, will you confirm the description of your
activities you gave when examined in the Procurator's office
before January 17, 1937?
Permit me to read Vol. V, page 119:
"The new and more far-reaching instructions Trotsky issued
in December 1935 carried his defeatist and restoration poliG.y._tp
extreme limits . . . ."
Do you confirm this?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: " . . . and the diminution of the prospects of the
bloc coming to power converted the Trotskyite organization into l
network of spies and diversionists for the German General
Staff. . . ."
Radek: Yes, I fully confirm it.
Vyshinsky: And further:
"And therefore it is not surprising that the centre of the bloc
grew nervous, I emphasize it, was afraid . . . "
Radek: Yes, yes.
Vyshinsky: . . . of taking responsibility for this platform arrived at by Trotsky himself with Hess and decided to summon a
conference of the active members of the organization. That is, the
chief motive was fright?
Radek: Yes.
132

Vyshinsky: You personally were of the opinion that this position should he rejected?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And that you ought to go to the Central Committee
in order to lay down your arms? But you did not go?
Radek: I did not.
Vyshinsky: And then you were arrested?
Radek: I was arrested, but I denied everything from beginning
to end. Maybe you will ask me why?
Vyshinsky: I know that you will always find an answer. You
were arrested and questioned. You .gave answers?
Radek: I denied everything from beginning to end.
Vyshinsky: You knew everything, you had the opportunity to
go and tell everything?
Radek: I· had, but I decided that l would do that in the PeoJ
ple's Commissariat of Internal Affairs . . . .
Vyshinsky: <:;omrade President, will you please ask the ac.cused
to answer questions and not to make speeches?
·
President: Accused Radek; you may make your two speeches.:
one---your speech in defence, and the other-yoor last plea.
Vyshinsky: I do not propose to engage in a .shouting match
with accused Radek. I am interrogating you, putting questions to
you. Answer the questions, if you please, and do not make
speeehes. I would ask you not to try to shout me down and not to
speak on questions that have nothing to do with the case.
In December 1935 and in 1936 you no longer accepted Trotsky's position. You were repelled by the treason that now became
clear to you in all its immensity. You therefore decided the question for yourself in the negative and wanted to discuss with your
accomplices what was to be done next?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You further said that you had the desire to go and
confess.
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And that you did riot go only 'because they came
for you and! arrested you. Am I putting it right?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Now I ask you: on September 22 you were inter. rogated and told that you were arrested on a charge of counterrevolutionary, Trofskyite activities. Before they proceeded to accuse _you on the basis of the evidence in possession of the investigating authorities, you had the opporhmity to tell all?
Radek: I did not do so.
Vgshinsky: The investigating official put the question. Did
you tell?
133

Radek: No.
Vyshinsky: After your arrest you were asked during examination whether you had sinned against the Party and the Soviet
state. \Vhat did you reply?
'
Radek: I replied that I had not.
.
Vyshinsky: \Vere you asked whether you had concealed in
secret places or at home any illegal documents? \Vhat did you
reply?
·
Radek: I was asked and I replied that I had not concealed
anything in secret places.
Vyshinsky: You were asked :about that-and did you tell the
truth?
Radek: I denied it, and this was the truth.
Vyshinsky: Were you further asked whether you had connec·tions wilh other persons-with Tivel?
Radek: I was asked.
Vyshinsky: Did you admit it?
Radek: I -denied everything from beginning to end.
Vyshinsky: Don't hurry, answer each part. Did you deny connections with Tivel?
Radek: I denied it.
Vyshinsky: Did you deny connections with Friedland?
Radek: I denied it.
Vyshinsky: \Vere you asked about connections with other
member;> of the terrorist group? What did you reply?
Radek: I denied it.
Vyshinsky: That was on September 22, 1936?
.....
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vere you confronted with Sokolnikov?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshimky: Did Sokolnikov expose you?
)'
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you?
Radek: I denied everything from beginning to end.
Vushinsky:.That was on September 22. '\Vere you confronted
with Tivel?
Radek: I was.
Vyshinsky: What did he say?
Radek: He said partly what was true and partly what was not
true, but I denied everything.
Vyshinsky: Both \vhat was true and what was not true?
Radek: Yes.
Vgshinskg: \Vere you on November 4 questioned about v~'rious
facts concerning your activity?

---

13!

'

Radek: Yes. I was questioned until December 4, and I denied
a·erYthin
"·
.
;::,
\-'ysliimky: For how many months ilid you deny everything?
Radek: About three months.
i:yshinsky: The fact remains that you. who wanted to tell
eyerything, only could not make up your mind, as you say, to
surrender your people to justice, when you yourself fell into the
hands of justice categorically den.ied everything. Is that a fact?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Does that not cast doubt on what you said about
your vacillations and misgivings? Radek: Yes, if you ignore the fact that you learned about the
program and about Trotsky's instructions only from me, of course,
it does cast doubt on what I have said
Vyshinsky: The important thing for me is _lo establish the fact.
Has the fact been established?
·
Radek: It has.
.
Vyshinsky: How can it be proved that after receiving the letter
from Trotsky in December 1935 and after the conversation with
Pyatakov you did not accept the line which you had fully and
unreservedly accepted until then? Have you such facts?
Radek: No.
·
Vyshinsky: And you do not intend to try to prove it?
Radek: No.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions.
The President: The court is adjourned until 6 p.m.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

135

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 24, 1937, 6.00 P.M.

Commandant:.The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: The session is -resumed. Have Counsel for Defence any questions to put to Raidek?
Counsel for Defence: (Rep-ly in the negative.)
The President: Accused Radek, in one of the statements in
your testimony you say: "It is useless trying to guess what the
conference would have led to. The faCt remains that even after
Trotsky's directives were received the centre continued its
wrecking activities just as it did before the directives were received." Do you confirm this?
Radek: I do.
The President: Has the Procurator any questions?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: We will now proceed to examine the witness
Romm. (To the Commandant.) Please ask witness Romm to
come in.
(Witness Romm enters ·the Court.)
The President: Is your name Romm?
Romm: Yes.
The President: What was your official position?
Romm: Journalist.
The President: What was your official position?
Romm: I was th.e correspondent of Izvestia in the Unittd States.
The President: You are summoned as witness in the case of
Pyatakov, Radek and others. You must give truthful evidence. For
false evidence you are liable to criminal prosecution.
Has the Procurator any questions?
.
Vyshinsky: How long have you known accused Radek?
Romm: Since 1922.
Vyshinsky: What were your ties with Ra<lek in the past?
Romm: At first I was acquainted with him in connection with
literary work and later, in 1926-27, I was connected wifu -hiiidri'
joint Trotskyite anti-Party work.
Vyshinsky: "What sort of work :was that?
Romm: Trotskyite anti-Party work.
Vyshinsky: Hence, you were a Trotskyite?
. Romm: Yes.
136

Vyshinsky: For a long period?
Romm: From the latter part of 1926 lip to the time I temporarilv left them about 1927.
~ l/yshinsky: And then you returned to them?
Ro_mm: I returned in 1931.
Vyshinsky: Undier anybody's influence, or independently?
Romm: I am not inclined to put on others the responsibility for
my own actions, but to the extent that anybody's individual influence was decisive, it was Ra<lek's influence.
Vyshinsky: Hence, you were fairly closely acquai!Ilted?
Romm: Yes.
Vyshinsky:·Were you connected by political interests?
Romm: Yes, and also hy friendly relations.
Vyshinsky: Were you ever in Geneva?
Romm: Yes, I was Tass correspondent in Geneva and also in
Paris. In Geneva from 1930 to 1934.
Vyshinsky: What interests me is your Geneva period: while in
Geneva did you have occasion to meet Radek?
Romm: Yes. In the spring of 1932. When Radek arrived in
Geneva I handed him a letter from Trotsky which I had received
from Sedov not long before that in Paris.
Vyshin.sky: Tell us how you received the letter from Trotsky,
what commission you were given, and how you carried out that
commi'ssion.
Romm: During our meeting in 1930, or 1931, Radek, while not
giving m~ any definite commission of a concrete character, said
that the former Trotskyites must keep together and, in partictilar,
he expected me to be prepared to serve as liaison man if necessary,
and to take advantage of my position as a foreign correspondent.
- Vyshinsky: When did that conversation take place?
Romm: In the autumn of 1930. and spring of 1931, when I
came to Geneva from Moscow.
Vyshinsky: What prompted that conversation?
Romm: A general interchange of opinion on the situation m
the Party and in the country.
Vyshinsky: What was it that prompted Radek to appeal to you
to keep together and to be prepared, as you say, to render political
services?
Romm: Yes, if necessary, services as a liaison man. This followed logically from our conversations, from which it became dear
to me that his sentiments were more strongly opposed to the Party
than ever, and when my own sentiments, influenced by the difficul~
ties of socialist construction, once again flowed into the old Trotskyite channel. He led me to understanid in a general iay that the
struggle had not ended, that the Trotskyites would havie to become
137

active again, and it was precisely from this general stand that the
things I spoke about followed.
In the summer of 1931, in passing through Berlin, I met Putna
who offered to put me in touch with Sedov. I met Sedov and in
reply to his question as to whether I was prepared, if necessary, to
serve as liaison man with Radek, I consented and gave him my
addresses in Paris and Geneva.
A few days before my departure for Geneva, while in Paris,
I received a letter posted in Paris, containing a short note frol_Il
Sedov asking me to convey a letter enclosed in the envelope to
Radek. I took this letter with me to Geneva and handed it to Radek
when I met him.
Vyshinsky: In handing over the letter did you say who it was
from?
Romm: I did not know who it was from.
Vyshinsky: Who handed it to you?
Romm: I received it by post with the request to hand it to
Radek. It was addressed to me at the Tass office in Paris.
Vyshinsky: What was written on the envelope, the a:didress and
name? How did you know that the letter had to be handed over?
Romm: With the letter there was a note from Sedov.
Vyshinsky: From S-edov. So you knew that the letter came from
Sedov?
Romm: The letter was enclosed in an envelope; .at that time
I did not know who it was from.
Vyshinsky: When didi you learn who it was from?
Romm: After handing over the letter I learned from the subsequent conversation with Radek that the letter was from Trot$,y.
Vyshinsky: The fact that the letter was from Trotsky was clear
to you when you received it from S.edov?
Romm: It was dear to me that Sedov was asking me to hand
Radek the letter that was enclosed in the envelope.
Vyshinsky: Did you know that this letter was from Sedov?
Romm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is what I ask: in handing over the letter which
was enclosed in the envelope did you say: Here is a letter from
Sedov?
Romm: Yes, I said that and told him of my meeting with Sedov'
in Berlin.
·
Vyshinsky: Did Radek read the letter in your presence, or after
you had gone?
.
Romm: He glanced through it quickly in my presence and put
it in his pocket.
V yshinsky: Hence, when youf handed the letter to Radiek it-was
dear to you that the letter was from Trotsky?·
·
·
138

Romm: Yes.
Vyshinskg: Did you know what Trotsky had written in that"
l€Uer to Radek?
Romm: Only in general outline.
Vyshinsky: I ask you, <lid you know, or not?
Romm: I knew the general contents.
Vyshinskg: When did the .general contents become known to
you?
Romm: From the conversation with Radek after he had read

.

~k~~

Vyshiizsky: That day, or the day after?
Romm: No, that very day.
Vyshimky: What did Radek tell you about the contents of that
letter?
Romm: That it contained instructions about uniting with the
Zinovievites, about adopting terrorist methods of struggle against
the leaders of the C.P.S.U., in the fir.st place against Stalin and
Voroshilov.
Then Radek left for Moscow and I did not see him until the
autumn of 1932.
Vgshinsky: What happened in the autumn of 1932, and where
were you at that time?
Romm: I was Tass correspondent in Geneva and Paris. I went
to Moscow on official business and met Radek who informed m!2
that in pursuance of Tfotsky's directives, a Trotskyite-Zinovievite
bloc had been organized, hut that he and Pyatakav had not joined
that centre.
Radek went on to say that the idea had arisen of creating a
resen·e, or parallel, centre, on which the Trotskyites were to
predominate, in order to have a reserve centre in the event of the
_functioning centre being discovered. He said that he wanted to
get directives from Trotsky on this matter and would like to
send a letter with me.
Vyshinsky: Did he mention any others of the same views?
Romm: He spoke about himself and Pyatakov; the names of
Sokolnikov and Serebryakov were mentioned.
Vyshinsky: Hence, he spoke to you about Pyatakov, Serebryako• and Sokolnikov?
Romm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In what connection were these names mentioned?
Romm: I understood that all these were to be members of
llie reserve centre if it were organized; but it was clear to me.
from the conversation that the enquiry would come from him and
Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: Did he mention any other names?
139

Romm: I think he only mentioned the names of Serebryakov
and Sokolnikov.
Vyshinsky: At all events, you said that he mentioned these
names in connection with the creation of the parallel centre?
Romm: That is so. Only the two of them, Radek and Pyatakov,
were .going to write to Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: To write about what?
Romm: I understood that it was to be a request for directives
concerning the idea of creating a parallel centre.
Vyshinsky: 'What does that mean: whether to create or not to
create?
Romm: Evidently, whether to create or not to create, and of
whom it was to consist.
Vyshinsky: Did Radek tell you at the time what arguments they
used in lIDging the necessity of creating such a centre, or perhaps,
on the contrary, they argued a·gainst the formation of such a
centre? Did he mention that, or not?
Romm: He did not advance any· arguments against. He advanced the arguments I have already mentioned, namely, first, that
the Zinovievites predominated in the functioning centre, and
second, that it was desirable to have a second centre which could
be preserved in the event of the first being exposed.
Vyshinsky: Hence, they had decided to organize such a centre
and only wa_nted sanction, or did they ask for advice on the
question, how to decide?
Romm: My impression was that they had <decided the question
in the affirmative, that is to say, that it was necessary to do it, and
that the letter would be written in order to obtain sanction.
- ·
Vyshinsky: \Vhat was written in that letter, did you know?
Romm: Yes, because the letter was handled to me and then
concealed in the cover of a German book before my <leparture
back to Geneva in the autumn of 1932.
1
Vyshinsky: In the autumn of 1932 you were returning to
Geneva and, taking advantage of your departure for Geneva, they
gave you this commission?
Romm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Who gave you this commission?
,
Romm: Radek. Passing through Berlin on my way to Geneva
I posted the book to the agreed address which Sedov had given-me: poste restante at one of the Berlin post offices. At the same
.time I sent a brief letter indicating that there was a letter in the
·book and where it was. concealed.
Vyshinsky: To the address agreed upon?
I '·l
Romm: Yes.
140

Vyshinsky: Both the book and the letter to the address agreed
upon?
Romm: The letter also to the address agreed upon.
Vyshinsky: Do you remember the address?
Romm: The address was, poste restante, Franzosische Strasse
Post Office, box number-I do not remember the card qumber, but
it is the sort of poste restante address that does not require any
name or surname, it only requires a earo number with which you
come and receive your mail.
Vyshinsky: Did yDu know the box number?
Romm: I did know it, but I have now forgotten it.
Vyshinsky: Did Sedov receive that letter? Do yo.u know that?
Romm: I presume he <lid because at our next meeting it was
clear to me that he had received it.
'
Vyshinsky: Had you any other meeting with Sedov?
Romm: My next meeting with Sedov took place in July 1933.
Vyshinsky: ·what was the occasion, where and how did you
meet again?
Romm: In Paris. I had arrived from Geneva and a few days
after Sedov telephoned me and made an appointment to meet me
in a cafe on the Boulevard l\fontparnasse. Sedov said he wanted
to anarige for me to meet Trotsky. A few days after he telephoned
me and made an appointment to meet me in the same cafe. From
there we. went to the Bois de Bou1ogne, where I met Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen was that?
Romm: At the end of July 1933.
Vyshinsky: How long did that meeting wit'h Trotsky last?
Romm: Twenty to twenty-five minutes.
Vyshinsky: For what purpose did Trotsky meet you?
Romm: As far as I could understand, in order verbally to confirm the instructions contained in the lelt.er I wa'S taking to Moscow.
He started the conversation with the question of creating the parallel centre. He said there was a danger in the predominaJ!ce of the
Zinovievit€s, hut that the danger would be_great only if the Trotskyites were not sufficiently active. He agreed with the idea of the
parallel centre, but only on the imperative condition that the bloc
with the Zinovievites was preserved and also on the condition that
the parallel centre shall not be inactive but sihall actively engage in gathering around itself the most stalwart cadres. Then
he went on to say that not only terrorism, but wrecking activities
. in industry, andJ in the national economy in general, were assum. ing special significance. He said th8:t, apparently, there was still
:_wavering on this point, but it had to be understood that loss of
;me was inevitable in carrying out acts of wrecking, and that
~·the main object was, by means of a number of wrecking opera-

~'

141

tions, to undermine confidence in Stalin's Five-Year Plan, in
the new technique, and in that way, to undermine confidence in
the Party leadership. Emphasizing the necessity of extreme measures, Trotsky quoted the Latin proverb to the effect: "What
medicine cannot heal, iron will heal, and what iron cannot heal,
fire will heal." I remember that, somewhat perplexed, I suggested
that this would undermine the defence capacity of the country at a
time when, with the accession of Hitler to power, the ..!anger of
war, and particularly the danger of au attack on the U.S.S.R. by
Germany, was becoming particularly acute. To this question I did
not get a comprehensive reply, but Trotsky hinted that it was
precisely the growing acuteness of the war danger that may place
defeatism on the order of the day.
Then he gave me a book, Novikov-Priboi"s novel, Tsusima, and
said that a letter to Radek was concealed in the cover. I took this
book with me to Moscow and on arrival handed it to Radek in his
apartment.
Vyshinsky: ·when was that?
Romm: That was in August 1933.
Further, I told Radek about my conversation with Trotsky. He
said that probably when I had returned from my vacation he
would give me a reply for Trotsky. When I returned from my
vacation, I received from Ra:dek a letter to Trotsky, also concealed
in the cover of a German book, which I was to hand to Sedov.
Vyshinsky: \Vb.en was that?
Romm: At the end of Sepiember 1933.
_
I handed this letter, or rather the book with the letter c6ncajed
in it, to Sedov in Paris in November 1933.
- My next meeting with Sedov took place in Paris in April, 1934.
Vyshinsky: \:Vhat was the occasion?
Romm: He telephoned me and expressed a desire to meet me.
I met him in the Bois de Boulogne. I informed him that I would·
soon be assigned to Amemca and that I could no longer serve
as liaison man. He expressed regret at this and, learning that
I was going to Moscow shortly, asked me to bring back from
Radek a detailed report on the situation, about the work of the
whole organization.
Vyshinsky: ·when was tha.t?
Romm: This meeting took place in April 1934.
Vyshinsky: Did you convey this message?
Romm: Yes, I did. I gave Radek the message and, in May 1934,
prior to my departure for America, he handed me a letter, again
concealed in a book-as far as I remember it v.ras an Anglo-Russian
tec'hnical dictionary. The letter, he said, contained a detailed re142

port from the active centre, as well as from the parallel centre.
about the development of political and diversive work. I handed
this letter, or rather the book containing .the letter, to Sedov in
Paris.
Vyshinsky: Was this all you delivered?
Romm: Altogether I delivered five letters from both -sides.
Vyshinsky: Suppose we count how many messages there were?
Romm: In Geneva I handed. Radek a letter from Trotsky. That
was in the spring of 1932. Then I received a letter from him in
September 1932. Then I received a letter from Trotsky in July 1933
and received a letter from Radek in September 1934.
Vyshinsky: No, 1933. Romm: Yes, 1933. And one other letter in May 1934.
Vyshinsky: In April?
Romm: No, in May, for in April I was in Paris.
Vyshinsky: And the technical dictionary?
Romm: That was in May 1934.
Vyshinsky: So altogether there were five messages?
Romm: Five messa-ges.
Vyshimky: This is apart from the conversations you had with
Sedov, which you informed Radek about when you met him?
Romm: Evidently the contents of these conversations were covered, a.lid even more than covered, by the contents of the letters.
Vyshinsky: That is a question of detail. I am concerned about
establishing facts: a number of parcels and a number of verbal
messages?
Romm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: -When you met Sedov, you conveyed to him the
infonp.ation given you by Radek. \\'hen you met Radek, you
conveyed Sedov's intfonnation, and you handed over a number
of documents from one to the other?
Romm: The main point in the conversations was an outline of
the general attitude.
Vyshinsky: In any case .this policy concerned your anti-Soviet
work?
·Romm: In this sense, undoubtedly.
Vyshinsky: You received an appointment to America?
Romm: Yes, I received an appointment to America.
Vyshinsky: In what capadty?
Romm: As correspondent of the Izvestia.
Vyshinsky: As the correspondent of Tass or of the Izvestia'!
Romm: As correspondent of the Izvestia.
Vyshinsky: And before that?
143

Romm: Before that I was Tass ·correspondent in Japan, Geneva
and Paris. TI1e handing over of Radek's letter to Sedov in May
1934 was actually the last commission which I fulfilled. Since then
I _have not fulfilled any commissions.
Vysbinsky: ·what was the gist-0f your conversations with Sedo\·
regarding your appointment to America?
Romm: Sedov told me that in connection with my going to
America Trotsky had asked to be informed in case there was anything interesting in the sphere of S-Oviet-American relations. When
I asked why this waJS so .interesting, Sedov.told me: "This follows
from Tr-0tsky's line on the defeat of the U.S.S.R. Inasmuch
as the date of the 'war of Germany and Japan against the U.S.S.R.
depenids to a certain extent on the state of Soviet-American relations, this cannot fail to he of interest to Trotsky."
Vyshinsky: To whom?
Romm: To Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: In other words you received through Sedov a proposal to inform Trotsky about relations between America and the
Soviet Union, from the viewpoint of Trotsky's orientation and his
line?
Romm: From the viewpoint of his defeatist position.
Vyshinsky: So you received, in effect, a proposal to be his corresp-0ndent?
Romm: His request wrus not to send ihim informati-0n, but fo
watch out for anything especially impdrtant 'which he could not
learn otherwise, and to write him about it.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, not just a correspondent, buea special
correspondent?
~ -~ ·
Romm: Quite so.
Vyshinsky: So you fulfilled a dual function as the correspondent of the Izvestia and special correspondent of Trotsky? So?
Romm: Yes. I agreed to send Trotsky information which inierested him.
Vyshinsky: You fulfilled this commission of Trotsky's?
Rqmm: No. The first months of my stay in America were wholly
devoted to getting my bearings in the new and strange surroundings, and there was n-0thing to report, while afterwards, even if
there had been anything, I would not have reported it, because after
the murder of Kiirov I resolved to stop active work.
·-· Vyshinsky: Did you receive the· addiress to which the correspondence was lo be sent?
Romm: Yes, Sedov gave me the address: poste restante, Post-e
Cenlrale, Paris, Rue du Louvre.
. Vyshinsky: You promised?
144

Romm: I agreed. I said that 1 did not reject the proposal and
agreed to send information which interested Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: Previously during the investigation you said as follows: .. I told Sedov that if I had any information that \.Yould interest Trotsky, I would report it to him."
Romm: Yes, quite right.
Vyshinsky: Did you have occasion to meet anyone from the
parallel centre a part from Radek?
Romm: No.
Vyshinsky: Pyafakov?
Romm: No, I did not meet him.
Vyshinsky: Only Radek?
Romm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Was Radek justified in telling the Court that Romm
was his secret liaison man?
Romm: I think that is correct inasmuch as I had nothing
to do with anyone save Radek; only Putna might have -known
besides him, and he only in the initial stage.
Vyshinsky: I have no mo:re questions to put to Romm.
Accused Ra<lek, you have just heard Romm's explanations. It
seems to me that Romm's statements tally with yours.
Radek: Yes. In general there are some inexactitudes, but only
of a w~ry minor character.
Vyshinsky: But is the factual side correctly given?
Radek: The factual side is correct in the main. Only one point
is incorrect. In Trotsky's first letter the names of Stalin and Voroshilov were not mentioned, sinee we never mentioned names in our
letters, or if we did, then in concealed form, using a special code
for this purpose. And since we did not yet have this code at the time
of ihe first letter, Trotsky could not possibly have mentioned the
names of Stalin and Voroshilov in the first- letter.
Vyshinsky: But this letter spoke about terrorism?
Radek: Yes, I do not dispute the sense of the letter, but since it
is a question of exactitude, I must say that these two names were
not mentioned.
Vyshinsky: And has Romm told the truth about the five cases?
About .Novikov-Priboi's book, a'bout the English tec:hnkal dictionary?
Radek: All quite true.
Vyshinsky: So it is all true?
Radek: Yes.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.}
The President: Have the accused :any questions to put to the
witness Romm? Has Radek any questions?
1

145·

Radek: ?\o.
The President: \Vitness Romm, you are released from g1vmg
further evidence. (To the Commandant.) Please lead witness Romm
out.
·
Vyshinsky: :May I put a question to the accused Ra,dek?
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky: Accused Radek, in your testimony you say: "In
1935 . . . we resolved to call a conference, but before this, in January, when I arrived, Vitaly Putna came io me with a request
from Tukhachevsky. . . ." I want to know in what connection you
mention Tukhachevsky's name?
Radek: Tukhachevsky had been commissioned by the govern·
ment with some task for which he could not find the necessary material. I alone was in possession of this material. He rang me up
and asked if I had this materiaL I had it, and he accordingly sent
Putna, with whom he had fo discharge this commission, to get
this material from me. Of course, Tukhachevsky had no idea either
of Putna's role or of my criminal role. . . .
Vyshinsky: And Putna?
Radek: He was a member of the organization, and he did not
come to talk about the organization, but I took advantage of his
visit to have this talk.
Vyshinsky: So Putna came to you, having been sent by Tukhachevsky on official business having no bearing whatever on your
affairs since he, Tukhachevsky, had no relations with them whatever?
Radek: Tukhachevsky never had any relations whatev~.r with
them.
· ""'-..
Vyshinsky: He sent Pui'na on official business?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you took advantage of this in order to engage
in your own particular affairs?
Radek: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Do I un.derstand you correctly, that Putna had dealings with the members of your Trotskyite underground organization, and that your reference to Tukhachevsky was made in connection with the fact that Putna came on official buSiiness on
Tukhad1cvsky's order5?
Radek: I confirm that, and I say that I never had and-could
not have had any dealings with Tukhachevsky connected with
counter-revolutionary activities, because I knew Tukhachevsky's
attitude to the Party and the government to be that o.f an absolutely
devoted man.
The President: \Ve shall now proceed to examine the accused
Sokolnikov.
146

Comrade Vyshinsky, have you any questions?
Vyshinsky: Accused Sokolnikov, please tell about your relations with the united_ Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist centre.
Sokolnikov: I knew the personnel of the united centre, I knew
its terrorist aims, I knew that as early as the autumn of 1932 the
united centre was planning ·preparations for terrorist acts against
Stalin and Kirov. I knew that Bakayev was charged with the
work of concentrating all the connections with the terrorist groups
of the united centre. I knew that the Moscow terrorist groups were
under the charge of Reingold.
Vyshinsky: Reingold?
Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: From whom did you know about this?
Sol,wlnikov: From Kamenev.
Vyshinsky: As regards the preparations for terrorist acts, you
have told the court that you knew that the united terrorist centre
was conducting preparations for terrorist acts against Comrades
Stalin and Kirov. In what year did you learn of this?
Sokolnikov: As a general task I knew about it in 1932.
Vyshinsky: And albout the preparations, about concrete steps?
Sokolnikov: I think it was in the autumn of 1934 that Karnenev
told me about this, without going into details. But he said that the
centre had been organizing an attempt on Stalin's life in Moscow.
Vyshinsky: But that this attempt had ended in failure?
Sokolnikov: Yes. And he said fu.at an attempt on Kirov's life was
being prepared in Leningrad.
Vyshinsky: After the assassination of Kirov in Leningrad you
did not happen to speak with Kamenev about this?
Sokolnikov: A few days later I happened to meet him in a
bookshop where there were other people at the counter; here we
talked only about the latest news in the papers; there was no other
talk between us.
Vyshinsky: You accepted Kamenev's proposal regarding the
organization of the reserve centre and regarding its composition, or
did you not discuss its composition?
·
Sokolnikov: Kamenev told me at that time--this 'was at the end
of the summer of 1932-that he would conduct negotiations on the
formation of the reserve centre.
Vyshinsky: He would conduct negotiations? \\Tith whom-did
he tell you?
Sokolnikov: No.
Vyslzinsky: And you ,did not bother to ask who else would be
in it?
Sokolnikov: He told me in general terms that he would speak147

\vith Tornsky. But he did not say with whom personally he was
going to .speak besides.
Vyshinsky: And what do you think, with whom could he have
spoken?
Sokolnikov: Regarding possible candidates for the centre?
Those were the same persons who were afterwards ma:de members
of the parallel centre.
Vyshinsky: But which of these candidates did Kamenev specifica1ly mention to you in that conversation?
Sokolnikov: I cannot recall if he named all of them.
Vyshinsky: But whom did he.name?
Sokolnikov: I recollect that he named Pyatakov and Radek.
Vyshinsky: And they afterwards joined the centre?
Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: When did you speak with Pyatakov and Radek
about your practical work in the parallel centre?
Sokolnikov: My work in the parallel centre began in the summer of 1935. Up lo then it had consisted only in carrying out a commission regarding negotiations with a certain diplomatic representative.
Vyshinsky: And when did you have your talk with this representative of a foreign state?
Sokolnikov: That was in the mM<lle of April 1934:.
Vyshinsky: And in H.134 did you happen to have conversations
with anyone regarding the defeatist position of the bloc?
Sokolnikov: I had a conversation with Kamenev in flle beginning of 1934:. During this conversation Kamenev infonnedme ajp_QUt
the defeatist position taken by Trotsky and about his own defea:tist
views. Incidentally, one definite result of this conversation was that
Kamenev warned me that someone might approach me with inquiries.
Vyshinsky: Who might do this?
'
Sokolnikov: TI1e diplomatic representative of a certain country.
Vyshinsky: Kamenev warned you about this?
Sokolnikov: Yes, Kamenev warned me about this.
VyshinsJ.:y: Did Kamenev tell you what inquiries wou1d be
addressed to you?
Sokolnikov: Yes, he told me that I wouldlbe asked for_confin:nation of the fact that the negotiations which were being carried
by Trotsky abroad were not being carried on by him in his own
name, but that behind Trotsky there really was an organization of
which he was the representative.
Vyshinsky: You were lo confirm this if inquiries in this sense
were addressed to you?

on--

148

Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Such a question was ad<lressea to you?
SokolnikolJ: Yes, in the middle of April after one of my official
talks with the representativ~ of a certain country with whom I ha<l
frequent meetings in connection with my official duties. The conversation took place after the official ta~k was over, when the interpreters had withdrawn to the neighbouring room. While I was
showing my visitor to the door he asked me whether I knew
that Trotsky had addressed certain proposals to his government.-!
confirmed that this fact was known to me. He asked further
whether these proposals were serious. i- confirmed this too. He
asked whether this was my own personal opinion; I said that t'his
was not only my opinion but tha:t of my friends as well. I und~r­
stood this question of his as a confirmation of the fact that the
government of that -country had really received Trotsky's proposals,
_and wanted tS> maike sure that Trotsky's proposals were really
known to the organization and that Trotsky's right to conduct
these negotiations was not· disputed.
Vyshinsky: What official post did you hold at that time?
Sokolnikov: Assistant People's Commissar of Foreign Affairs.
Vyshinsky: Did you tell anybody about this -conversa_tiori with
the-representative of the foreign country?
Sokolnikov: I spoke about this conversation -about a month
later to Radek, and then to Pyatakov. This was shortly after my
conversation with the diplomat. I had another meeting with Radek
-in July 1935. In July 1935 Radek informed me' that Trotsky had
expressed dissatisfaction at -the fact that I had performed this
commission in a formal way, that is to say, that I had .confirmed
the mandate but had not confirmed the proposals themselves,
had not defended them, had not championed them.
Pyatakov has told about this and Radek has told about it,
so I <lo not k'Ilow if 1it is n~essary for me to dwell upon Jt !further.
I can say what I considered to he the commission that was assigned
to me alone: to confirm the proposals Trotsky made at the end of
1933; whether they still held good in the spring of 1934; I considered
that it was a matter of confirming his authority to negotiate, to enable him to continue negotiations. At what stage these negotiations
were, I <lo not know.
-Vyshinsky: \Vhat. happened after that?
Sokolnikov: Pyatakdv asked me aibout this considerably later
-in 1935. I eonfirmed the fact to him too. We did not see each
other until 1935. But in 1935, when we met after the parallel centre
had commenced its activities, Pyatakov, in a conversation about
: 149

which I shall speak later, asked me, among other things, what
our conversation had been about. I told him.
Pyatakov (to the President): May I give an explanation. concerning the question raised by Sokolnikov?
The President: You may.
Pyatakov: \Vas it on his own initiative that Sokolnikov spoke
to Radek? Sokolnikov's memory might have betrayed him, because there wa:s no ,special conversation between us; I merely told
him briefly that Raidek had asked him to ring him UP,.
Sokolnikov: Possibly.
Vyshinsky (to Sokolnikov): Proceed.
Sokolnikov: In the summer of 1935, several months after the
arrests of the Zinovievites and a part of the Trotskyites, knowing
that I had been appointed to the parallel centre, I considered it
my -duty to get info contact with its members.
I did not at first speak to Pyatakov, but about three weeks or a
month before that, I met Radek.
The questions which Radek and I .discussed concerned the
carrying out of the terrorist line and problems of organization in
conneciion with it. \Ve then discussed certain questions of program.
.
Vyshinsky: Which, for examp'le?
Sokolnikov: Questions of program in connection with the
change in the international situation.
I forgot to say that I knew of the negotiations which the members of the united centre had conducted with the Rights.
Vyshinsky: With whom personally?
"'> .
Sokolnikov: I know that Kamenev conducted negotiations with
Bukharin and Rykov. I know that Zinoviev and somebody else, I
cannot now recall who, conducted negotiations with Tomsky and
Uglanov.
· ~·
In the course of these negotiations it was established that
agreement existed on fundamental questions of program and the
tactical line and, in particular, with regard to the ad'OJ)tion of
terrorist methods of strugg.le.
But the Rights did not join t11e bloc. They declared that while
they agreed with everything, they wanted to retain their own separate organization, their central group, and only main-tain--contact
with the united centre.
As regards the principles of the program, as early as 1932 the
Trotskyites, the Zinovievites and the Rights had all come to agree
in the inain on the program which previously had been described
as the program of the Rights.
This \Vas the so-called Ryutin platform. As early as 1932 it

an

150

expressed to a large extent just these principles of program which
were common to all three groups.
As regards the further development of this pro.gram, the leading
members of the centre considered that, as an isolated revolution,
our revolution could not remain a socialist revolution, and that
Kautsky's theory of super-imperialism and the kindred Bukharin
theory of organized capitalism had proved to be correct.
We considered that fascism was the moot orgariize<l form of
capitalism, that it would triumph, would seize Europe and stifle
us. It was therefore better to come to terms with ·11, it was better
to consent to a compromise in the sense of retreating from socialbm to capitalism. All this was explamed by tlie folfowiir1g
argument: better make oertain sacrifices, even very severe
ones, than lose everything. I should explain, emphasize this prin~
ciple, because without it, it would be quite impossible to understand how the bloc anrd the ,centre of the bloc could' have entered
upon the course of terrorist struggle, of wrecking struggle, of
diversive acts, on a defeatist position. There had to be a certain
meaning in alJ.l f!his. This meaning is contained .in t!his very posi.
lion whic'h was also a defeatist position, but one af a somewhat
rliffe_n~nt type, i.e., it was defeatism in rngar.d lo the socialist
character and ro the socialist gains of our revolution. The bloc
renouneed them, :md having r'e.nounced this~! do not want to
speak now about other points of view, I am explaining the
point of view t:o which the members of the· united centre and, so
far as I understand, the members of the parallel centre adhered
-they considered that by this principle everything should be
. guided and that it justified everything; but in reality, of course,
all this led to the policy of the bloc, which I wilil not characterize
now.
Vyshinsky: I take it, you have just set forth your conversation
with Radek?
Sokolnikov: No; I am now summarizing everything.
Vyshinsky: Then we haVle somewhat digressed from our subject.
Sokolnikov: Yes. Allow me to revert to the conversation with
Radek so as to finish with this question of program. During this
conversation we spoke of the changes that had 'taken place: ·We
said that while in 1933 anci 1934 the principa1l military menace
to the Soviet Union lay in the Far East, Jn 1935, the principal
military menace, the most serious, was offered by Germany.
Next, during this conversation we discussed the fascists' suecesses,
the spread of fasdsm in Europe and the new factors which must
be considered in our policy on account of this. Such was the conversation on questions of program which we had in July 1935.
151

Vyshinsky: Did you have any conversations with Ra<lek after
July 1935?
· Sokolnikov: Yes. It was in the winter of 1936, approximately
at the end of January 1936.
,
Vyshinsky: Did you know that Radek at that time had receiv~d
.. ~(letter from Trotsky?
Sokolnilcov: You see, I can say nothing about the letter because
it happened that Pyatakov's return after his meeting with Trots:ky
m:ersha-dowed as it were the information contained in that letter,
so that I cannot recall that any prominence was given to this letter
in the conversation I had with Pyatakov when he told me of this
meeting, or in the conversation with Radek.
Vyshinsky: So y-0u had two conversations on this subject, with
Pyatakov and Radek?
Sokolnikov: Yes, within a very short interval.
Vyshinsky: Had you spoken to Pyatakov first o~ to Radek?
Sokolnikov: To Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: You spoke to Pyatakov after he had returned from
aibroad?
Sokolnikov: Yes. That was in January 1936. Pyatakov told me
that Trotsky had been negotiating with Hess. In these negotiations
Hess was empowered to put forward demands which concerned
not only Gennan interests but also the interests of another country.
Pyatakov told me that he had understood Trotsky to say that these
were negotiations on a number of questions, and that agreement
had been reached on fhem. Of course it was assumed that this <lraft
agreement would be submitted to official circles as well anil would
not remain merely an agreement between these two persons. ~:- ·
That is to say, the first alternative was designed for the contingency of power passing into the hands of the bloc irrespective
of anything arising before the outbreak of the war. To put it
plainly, in such an event the other side undertook to give the
government of the bloc its friend~y support. As rega!:ds t!he bloc_,
it undertook a number of obligations of an economic character
which secured economic advantages to the other side.
Vyshin.sky: Is it this that Radek and Pyatakov spoke about?
Sokolnikov: Yes. The second aUernafive erwisaged that the
bloc would come to power as a resuilt of a war and as-a resultof the defeat of the Soviet Union. In this event the parties to the
agreement pledged themselves to es,tablish Telations with the government of the bloc, thus, strictly speaking, I think, ensuring their
advent to power, and hence withholding support from rival groups.
The bloc undertook to conclude peace immediately and recognize
territorial concessions.
152

Vyshinsky: Namely?
Sokoln'ikou: In this agreement they were stated as follows:
that Japan, in the event of her taking part in the war, would receive territorial concessions in the Far East in the Amur Region
~nd the Maritime Province; as regards Germany, it was contemplated to "satisfy the national interests of the Ukraiine._" Beneath
this transparent veiiJ. was understood tihe establishment of German
control over the Ukraine couptled witll the ,secession of the latter
from the U.S.S.R. Moreov.er, _a number of economic concessions
were contemplated, going somewhat farther than the economic
concessions of the first alternative. But none the less I woul'd not
say that the peculiarity of the second alternative lay in the character of these economk concessions. The basis of these negotiations
of Trotsky with Hess was-and this of course must he acknowledged with complete clarity-Trotsky's undertaking to ensure that
the bloc pursi.Ied a •defeatist :tine of action. _This was what Trotsky
on his side had to offer on behalf of the bloc in those negotiations
--Qtherwise it is dear that they would never even have talked.
with him. Pyatakov tolltd me that when he heard this project for
the agreement in its finished and fully developed form, very
grave doubts arose in his mind as to whether it was necessary
to make such an agreement. He warned Trotsky that he thought
it necessary on his return to Moscow to convene a conference, or
several conferences, limited to the most trusted members of the
bloc, in order to inform them about this project for the agreement
and to give Trotsky a final answer after 'this exchange of
opinions.
Vyshinsky-: What was Pyataikov's attitude to this proposal and
to Trotsky's agreement?
Sol·olnikov: Pyatakov was strongly opposed to a number of
points in the agreement just as I and Radek were; but Pyatakmr,
as far as I know, did not object to Trotsky continuing the negotiations pending the centre's reply-that is, he was in favour of
negotiations being continued. As far as I know, there was no ban
on the part of the centre of the bloc or on Pyatakov's part.
Vyshinsky: Negotiations on what basis?
Sokolnikov: The .negotiations whicJh TrotSky had conducted .
with Hess were continued on the same basis as before. Certain
points still remained to be specified and so forth. True, Trotsky
said that he was reckoning-that in the further course of the
negotiations he thought that he would succeed in driving a better
bargain in some respects, but of course what mattered were not
these individual amendments but the baS'is.

t5a

Here, when we talked with Pyatakov in Mosco·w after his
return, then, as I say (of course, this may be of no importance
at the trial but in expounding our sentiments it may be of importance) both Pyatakov and I hesitated, of ·course, when we saw
this agreement in its amplified and finished form-an agreement
which, properly speaking, summed up everything we had been
doing for a number of years or a number of months, and to which
we had been gradually slipping.
·
But I must say none tl1e less that I think our conclusion in this
conversalion was ·that we did not oontemplate any Qther course
than this.
Vyshinsky: Oth~r than what course?
Sokolnikov: Than the course which Trotsky was already advoca1'ing. The point is that in analyzing this agreement point by
point we could not fail to see that after all it contained nothing

new.
Vyshinsky: Nothing new in comparison with what?
Sokolnikov: ·In comparison with what we had had, to some
extent, since 1932 and, in the main, since 1934, when the defeatist
attitude of the bloc finally took shape.
Vyshinsky: So there was nothing new in comparison with the
pr.indples whkh had previously been laid down?
Sokolnikov: You see, I mll.5t correct myself. It is not that there
was nothing new-that is incorrect.
Vyshinsky: In principle?
Sokolnikov: In principle there was nothing new. "'.,·
Vyshinsky: That is just what I am talking abouf·' Qu~Q_titatively perhaps, but qualitatively?
- -·-~
Sokolnikov: Of course, quantity passes into quality.
Vyshinsky: Under certain conditions.
Sokolnikov: In a cert::iiri measure. Here we had, sad though
it is to cornfess it, a sort of concentrated essence, and all these el~­
ments were derived from one soul'ce, strengthened one another,
of course, confronted us with a problem of the following nature.
After all, we reasoned as politicians. We understood that it was
not a question of our feelings, good or bad; we reasoned as politicians,. and, consequently, we had to decide a political problem
which consisted of only one poirit: could we by adopting- this -most
painful course, which in regard to the existing Party leadership,
in regard to the SO'Vi.et power, in regard to the Soviet Union represented, as we understood fuU well, a series of the most heinous
crimes, of the most shameful crimes, represented treason and so
. forth-we had to decide whether after/ paying this price we
would be able to utilize this hostile force.
1

1

154

l'yshinsky: Or they would utilize you?
Sol.·olnikov: Or they would utilize us, if we became simply
an appendage of German fascism, which would utilize us and
then throw us away like a dirty- rag, we would be condemned,
disgraced :md proved to be utter nonentities.
Vyshinsky: And did you expect any other fate than to be utilized
by fascism and then thrown away like a useless rag?
Sokolnikov: Of course. If we had counted only on such an end
we ought to have liquidated the bloc completely.
Vyshinsky: You thought you could retain some indepen·
dence?
Sokolnikov: I am saying what we thought at that time. We
figured that we had certain chances. Where ·rud we see them? We
saw them in the play of international contradictions. We considered that, let us say, complete sway in the Soviet Union could never
be established by German fascism because it would encounter the
objections of other imperialist rivals, that certain international
conflicts might occur, that we could rely on other forces which
would not be interested in strengthening fascism.
·
We considered that within the country we could rely upon
certain s1rata. I must say that we rea'lized that in our line of policy
we must return to capitalism and must advance a program of
capitalisnr, for then we coull<l rely up<m certain strata in the
country.
Vyshinsky: Specifically on what forces within the country did
you calculate? On the working class?
Sokolnikov: No.
Vyshinsky: On the collective farm peasantry?
Sokolnil.:ov: Of course not.
Vyshinsky: On whom then?
Sokolnikov: To speak quite frankly, I must say that we reckoned on ,being able to rely on the elements of the peasant bourgeoisie. . . .
Vyshinsky: On the kulaks, on the few remnants of the kulaks?
Sokolnikov: That is so. The bloc was to lead to the growth of
these few remnants. I repeat that, of course, our program of a deal
with German fascism that would ensure the bloc coming to power
would also involve big social changes in the Soviet Union and the
appearance of forces which ·wou1d support the government of the
bloc.
Vyshinskg: Changes in what direction?
Sokolnikov: Changes in the direction of the restoration of capitalism. The elements which would be interested in this and would
accept it as a blessing would be satisfied with such a policy· and
would support the bloc. But I want to- say that this prospect was
1

155

not very much better than the prospect of proving to be a mere
appendage of German fascism. But this offered a prospeet of the
bloc being able to maintain power in the country, again by manoeuvring in a definite way between the various classes, relying on
certain classes as against others.
Vyshinsky: In a word, to put it briefly, through what stages lay
·your path to power according to your idea?
Sokolnikov: The path to power lay through the •gradual restoration of capitalist elements, which would squeeze out and to a
certain extent replace the socialist elements.
Vy,~hinsky: And what about the aggressors?
Sokolnikov: "\Ve were prepared to come to an agreement with
them, the result of which would be that in the course of war and
as a result of the defeat of the Soviet Union, the government of the
bloc would come to power.
Vyshinsky: It would therefore be correct to say that you were
banking on help from foreign interventionists?
·
Sokolnlkov: You see . . . perhaps it is something worse . . . .
Vyshinsky: I am not speaking of what is worse or of what is
better. I am not passing moral judgment. I am establishing facts.
I, as the representative of the State prosecution, assert that you
were directly staking on the assistance of foreign aggressors, on
the assistance of foreign interventionists. Is my assertion correct?
Sokolnikov: It is correct that we calculated on the help of foreign ag.gressors. Interventionists-I would not say.
Vyshinsky: The aim was one that the aggressors would set?
Sokolnikov: They have their own aim. . . .
.
Vyshinsky: That is true, they have their own aims, and yoll had
yours. But you counted on achieving your aims by helping them:
to achieve theirs. Is that right?
Sokolnikov: It is right.
Vyshinsky: Therefore, was I right when I formulated it in the
indictment as follows: "The main task which the parallel centre
set itself was the forcible overthrow of the Soviet gO'Vernment with
the object of changing the social and political system existing in
the U.S.S.R . . . ." Is that formulation correct?
Sokolnikov: Yes, correct.
Vyshinsky: Further on in the indictment I say: "L. D. Trotsky,
and on his instructions the parallel Trotskyite centre, aimed at
seizing power w-,ith the aid of foreign states with the onjecfof'
restoring capitalist social relations in the U.S.S.R. . . . " Is that
formulation correct?
Sokolnikov: Correct.
The President: Adjournment for 20 minutes.
*·
*
*
156

Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: The session is resumed. (To Vyshinsky.) Have
you finished?
Vyshinsky (to Sokolnikov): You said t<hat you proceeded from
the necessity of relying upon certain social strata of the population. You named the kuilaks as a supp-0rt of the bfoc. Is this
formulation correct?
Sokolnikov: Yes, as such a force which, if it received definite
ad'°antages from the government of the bloc, would be interested
in preserving the power of this bloc.
Vyshinsky: What other elements did you count on in addition
to theseJ Did the bloc expect to confine itself in the struggle to its
own forces only, or did it intenicf to unite with other anti-Soviet
elements in the country?
.
Sokolnikov: Undoubtedly. This followed from the economic
policy outlined hy the bloc. Naturally, if the bloc proposed to grant
concessions to foreign capital, to lease certain factories to foreign
capital, if it had in viiew, at least at first, the partial dissolution of
collective farms, it is obvi<YUs that this would create not only direct
elements of large-scale capitalism, but also a petty-capitalist en'ironment, petty traders, a petty bourgeoi~ie, which would be
inter~sted in preservation of this regime and wO'Uld therefore sup·. port the b[oc .
. Vyshinsky: Now wiit'l1 regard to what you say about the social
· and economic plans: what was the attitude of the blOc towards the
policy of industrialization?
Sokolnikov: A negative one. The bloc considered that the
policy of industrialization would be cut short, that part of the
enterprises would be handed over to concessionaires.
Vyshinsky: That is, you wanted to renounce the policy of industrialization?
· Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And the policy of collectivization?
Sokolnikov: It was proposed to renounce the present policy of
collectivization, to put a $lop to that policy.
Vyshinsky: And what was your attitude towards the existing
c()llective farms?
·. Sokolnikov: Of course, it was not proposed to dissolve all the
collective farms forcibly; part ·of the coUective farms might be able
to hold on.
_ Vyshinsky: Was it proposed to adopt any government measures
to strengthen, or, on the contrary, to destroy flhe collective farms?
SoJ..:olnikov: It was proposed to stop giving government support
to the collective farms.
Vyshinsky:That meant renouncing the policyofcollectiviza•hion?
151

Sokolnikov: Leaving the collective-farms to their own fate.
Vyshinsky: The nature of a policy is that a state in its activities
supports a certain tendency. \Vell then, renunciation of the policy
of industrialization?
·
Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Renunciation of the policy of collectivization?
Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: This was part of the plan of social and economic
measures outlined by the bloc?
_
Sokolnikov: I think I have already spoken of that. It formed
part of the pfan of the bloc, and we also realized that what followed from this was the renunciation of the policy of directly
building a classless society.
Vyshinsky: That means the restoration of the class division of
society?
Sokolnikov: The restoration of capitalism is the restoratiOn of
classes.
Vyshinsky: Different class·es, including the class of exploiters?
Sokolnikov: Of course, the kulaks are the worst kind of exploiters.
Vyshinsky: Well then, for the sake of complete clarity, we
establish the following: you conceive the ensemble of these measures to constitute a program of capitalist restoration?
Sokolnikov: This program is an inevitable and necessary inference from the program of the Rights, or to put it plainly, from the
program of retreat or of the restoration of capitalism.
~
Vyshinsky: \.Vere the formulations of this program as -you g~ve
them now discussed by you with the other members of the centre'?_
Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \\Tith whom specifically?
Sokolnikov: I recall such a conversation in 1933 with Kamenev.
I recall similar conversations with other members of the centre. As
to particular points. there were talk.s with Pyatakov about industrialization, and talks with Tomsky a.bout .collective farm policy
in the autumn of 1935.
Vyshinsky: \Vas the attitude of your centre as a whole favourable or unfavourable to this?
Sokolnikov: I consider that the centre adopted this pTogram, It
was not written down. It was the program of the centre, and 'it was
Trotsky's program also. I was to·ld that when speaking of a bloc
with the Rights, Trotsky emphasized the idea that there were no
differences with the Rights.
Vgshinsky: No differences on this question?
Sokolnikov: No.
158

Vyshinsky: \Yere there in your centre no vacillations, no do-µbts,
were there not varying conceptions of these problems?
Sokolnikov: I find it difficult to answer this question. I beg you
to understand "\vhy. I do not want to say that I was in a special
position and to separate myself from the other members of the
organization; but it was mentioned here, and it was so .in fact,
that between the members of the centre of Trotskyite prigin there
were closer, more intimate and more trustful relations than there
were with me. The relations with me were of a rather official
character.
Vyshinsky: The question of program is not a personal matter.
Sokolnikov: Judging by all the conversations I had andi by
Trotsky's instructions, I consider that no unclarity existed.
·
Vyshinsky: And you eonsider that all the members agreed with
this point of view, that this was the common viewpoint expressed
in the program?
Sokolnikov: In a number of communications-which were confirmed here-made· to me in the name of Trotsky, who not only
guided the parallel centre, but also gave instructions to those mem·bers of the centre with whom he had close relations-in a number
of directives he emphasized this.
Vyshinsky: And this program defined the elements on which
you could rely?
Sokolnikov: Of course.
Vyshinsky: How would you, in the most exhaustive and complete form, describe the elements upon whom you proposed to rely?
Sokolnikov: To speak without any circumlocution or reservation, it must be said that this program for the restoration of capitalism meant the creation of elements of a new bourgeoisie, and this.
new bourgeoisie, of course, would welcome all the concessions
which the bloc would. make.
Vyshinsky: Were you aware of the enlistment in your Trotskyite, anti-Soviet criminal activities of non-memher:s of the Trotskyite
organization, of other people with an anti-Soviet attitude of mind?
Sokolnikov: Pyata;kov told me that the directive given by
Trotsky about the development of wrecking activities pointed out
that the group of the bloc which conducted wrecking activities
must establish connections . with other coU1Ilter-revolutionary
groups.
Vyshinsky: ·with which groups?
Sokolnikov: I cannot say specifically. With other counterrevolutionary groups conducting similar' work. It was pointed out
that former wrecking organizations among· the specialists should
be found. f'
Vyshinsky: Among the former wreckers of the period of the
159

Industrial Party and the Shakhty trial? Well then,, what was your
line?
Sokolnikov: Trotsky's line, which permitted the wrecking
groups of the bloc to establish contact with these groups.
Vyshinsky: Did you know that one or another of you.r
Trotskyite groups had established contact with some of the
wreckers among the old Shakhty crowd or among the former adherents of the Industrfal Party, and so forth?
Sokolnikov: No, I did not know that. The point is that I did
not know about the wrecking work. I knew about the directive
before that, ibut about the wrecking activiities I was informed
by Pyatakov in the autumn of 1935.
Vyshinsky: Did you yourself take part in wrecking activities?
Sokolnikov: No.
Vyshinsky: In whose hands was that?
Sokolnikov: The direction of wrecking activities?
Vyshinsky: Yes.
Sokolnikov: In Pyatakov's hands.
Vyshinsky: Mainly?
Sokolnikov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Or exclusively?
Sokolnikov: I understood that the general direction ·of this
, work was in the hands of Pyal:akov.
Vyshinsky: Comrade President, permit me to question Shestov.
~The President: You may.
Vyshinsky: Accused Shestov, we will examine you later on.
For the moment i.n connection with my question to. the iij;:cused
Sokolni<kov, I would ask you to reply to the same question. Wl~l
have you to say aib-oiut using various wreckers--non-Trotskyitesfor your undermining Trotskyite work? Did that take place?
Shestov: Yes, that took place. I remember quite well my conversations in Berlin in May 1931.
Vyshinsky: With whom?
Shestov: \Vit'h Sedov, with Smirnov, with Yuri Leonj.dovich
Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: You say: with Sedov, with Smfrnov, with Pyatakov.
\Vhat was this, a conference of you four, or did you have separate
conversations with each of them?
Shestov: I conversed with each of them separately.
Vyshinsky: You spoke with Sedov?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Tell me briefly what you discuss-eel with Sedov.
Shestov: Sedov then formulated the p0>int that it was necessary
to enlist all the forces hostile to the Stalin leadership.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat w~s meant by that?
160

Shestov: Before that I had given him a brief report on the situation in the Kuzbas. :My work js in the Kuzbas. I told him that I
knew that among the old engineers there were remnants of the
Shakhty wreckers, members of the Industrial Party, who were
carrying on wrecking, COl,lnter-revolutionary activities.
\Vhen Sedov talked about enlisting the so-caUed-forces hostile
to the Stalin regime, he said: "There you have the human material."
Later on Yuri Leonidovich Pyatakov said the same thing to me.
Vyshinsky: In what connection did he say this?
Shestov: \Vhen he gave me instructions to 'carry on undermining and destructive work in the Ruzbais. It is true that Pyatakov did not put it in that way then. -He said that all means and
efforts must be exerted to put a stop to Stalin's in<llllstrializalfon
game.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat year was that?
Shestov: In 1931. I had a definite talk on this subject with
Y. L. Pyatakov in June. But before that I had had two fairly comprehensive conversations with Sedov and Smirnov on this subject.
I recall quite well that when Sedov raised the question of counteracting Stalin's industrialization I asked him: "What do you mean,
eounteracting? After all I am a human being, I would have to do
this work, I don't understand. I can understand wrecking; but
wrecking cannot be so effective. I know examples from our Soviet
life, examples from the life of the Donbas, the Shakhty wrecking
activities." He said: "Don't you really understand~ The f!Uestion
is being put more firmly, more sharply, and my father· bluntly
speaks about carrying out a number of measures of this 'kind
which, in their totali_ty, will put a numb.er of enterprises out of
. action." "In other words," I saiid ta( him, "work of destruction, is
that what you mean, Lev Lvovich?" He replied: "Why, of course,
whar else can it mean?" Later I asked Smirnov and he also forri:mlated it distinctly both in regard to forces hostile to the Stalin
regime, and the carrying out of destructive and und1ermining measures in industrv.
Vyshinsky: i am asking about enlisting non-Trotskyite anti'Soviet people.
·
Shestov: Sedov told me that, and later on Smirnov said that
in the struggle against the Stalin government all means are justified,
mid in the.present case it was necessary to enlist all the hostile
forces in the country. All those who were against Stalin were with
us. I considered that I understood well enough what there could
be in tl:ie country that was opposed fo Stalin.
Vyshinsky: Hence, this line was given you in 1931.
Shestov: Yes.
··
/'
.
.
Vyshinsky: And in this connection did you do anything in the
161

way of carrying out this directive? Did you yourself have occasion to rec>uit any of these forces?
Shestou: Not only that but when I returned to the Kuzbas I started my destructive work there, because I had then told Sedov, Smirnov and Pyatakov that we had no support whatev·er among the
workers and peasants, and to hope that I would be able to recruit
active wreckers among them-on that score I ha<l 1I10 illusions
whatever. I coul<;]. only recruit kulaks-, that l could see; but as for
workers and peasants, I could not conceive of it, and I did not
have it in my thoughts to bring up sud1 a question. In understood
that for destructive and uncrermining work, to ~e able to organize
it in such a way as to ha1ve all the measures accomplished and to
prevent the Trotskyite organization from !being exposed, it was
necessary to recruit highly skilled forces for the purpose of carrying out precisely destructive work. ·what if I could recruit a
highly .skilled worker who at most could put a machine out of
action? When it came to the question of whole enterprises, it was
clear to me that we must have first class people.
Vyshinsky: \Vere such directives and instructions given you?
Shestov: Yes, and specific reference was made to engineer
wreckers.
Vyshinsky: Hence, such directives were given?
Shestov: Yes. I received t~hem from.Pyatakov, but not in a com·prehensive form. He said: "You in the Kuzbas have suf.fioient
material of .that kind."
··
· 'Vyshinsky: Accused Pyatakov, do you confirm Shestov's explanation?
"'·
Py.atakou: Yes. I recall that there was ~ conversa ti oft? on J!tis
-..
.subject; I remember it was with Sedov and Shestov.
· Vyshinsky: Hence, you were then discussing the enlisting of
anti-Soviet forces? .
·
Pyatakov: Yes, we were discussing the enlisting of anti-Soviet
forces from among the engineers.
The President (to VysJhinsky): Y<)u have no more questions
to Shestov?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: And none to the accused So[rnlnikov?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: Tell me, accused Sokolnikov, which_Jer_rorist
groups were you connected with in 1935-36?
· · -Sokolnikov: In 1935 Tivel came to me and infonned me that
he was connected with the Zaks-Gladnyev terrorist group. Tivel
asked for instructions about the further activities of this group.
Then he told me about his meeting with the Zaks-Gladnyev group
and reported that this group had beeri in ·exisrence for several
162

months and that it numbered several persons, six I think; and he
also said that he had instructions from Zaks-Gladnyev, who was
leader of this group. Through me the instructions that had existed
pre\·iously were kept in force.
The President: Did you confirm that?
Sokolnikov: Yes, I confirmed it.
The President: On whose life was this group preparing to make
an attempt?
Sokolnikov: Tivel told me then that they had instructions to
prepare for a terrorist act against Stalin.
The President: \Vhen was the last time you met the representatives of this terrorist group?
Sokolnikov: I did not directly meet the members of this group.
As far as I can r~member, Tivel came to see me again in the beginning of 1936 and told me that the group was continuing its work
in Moscow. Up to that time they had been keeping wateh in the
suburbs, and now they were keeping watch in Moscow.
The President: Did you know who were lhe memhers of that
group?
Sokolnikov: I did not know who were the members of the group
except for one member whom Tivel mentioned to me, a person
whom I had met previously in the course of my work. That was
Fligeltaub. I did not know any of the others.
The President: In addition to this group, what other terrorist
groups did you know of?
Sokolnikov: I was not in any way directly connected with other
groups.
The Pres'ident: Were you not coRnected with the Friedland
group?
Sokolnikov: I was not connected with this group of Fried.land's, but I was personally acquainted with Friedland. This was
at the end of 1935. But in view of the fact that arre.sts hadi begun
among the historians, he told me that he. too, expected to be
arrested, as he, as far as I remember, so he said, was a member of
a tenorist group. He told me that he had learned of my belonging
f.o the organization from Radek, with whom he was connected.
The President: You knew that there was a terrorist group, one
of the leaders of which was G. S. Friedland?
Sokolnikov: No, I did nof know of the existence of this group.
I knew that he was a member of a group.
The President: In your testimony you say the following:
"I knew of the existence of a terrorist group of which Friedland was a member. ... I learned from Friedland that this group
was preparing to commit a terrorist act against the lea.deri5' of
the Party and the government."
163

· Sokolnikov: Yes, I confirm this, but I do not know whether this
was called the Friedland group; but he told me that he was a
member of this group, that such a group existed, that it was
connected with Radek.
·
The President: \Vhat do you know about the terrorist activities
of the group headed by Dreitzer, and generally, about the terrorist
activities of Dreitzer in the period 1935-36?
Sokolnikov: I knew that Dreitzer was the person in the Trotskyorganization who had general dli.rection of the terrorist groups._
In particular, Dreitzer was discussed at a meeting I had with Radek in the summer of 1935 when Ra·dek said that he considered
it necessary to caU Dreitzer in order to obtain from him information about htls work, about the groups that were in existence, and
sb forth, but I do not know anything <definite about the.groups that
were conneded with Dreitzer.
.
The President: Did you know that Drcitzer was himself -direct-'
ing the preparations for an attempt on the lives of ComTade<.s
Stalin and Voroshilov in 1934?
Sokolnikov: Under the old centre?
The President: Yes, yes.
Sokolnikov: Yes. At that time Kamenev mentioned Dreitzer's
name to me.
.
, The President: Who was connected with this group's preparations for an attempt on the lives of Comrades Stalin and Voro~hilov?
·
. Sokolnikov: I <lo not remember that now, but undoubtedly
Dreitzer's name was mentioned to me then as the man wfu had
the most responsible commissions from the centre, so that the;e'
can be no doubt that it was on the lines of the principal leaders
~f the Party and the government.
The President: In your testimony you say as follows:
"In the terrorist activities of the (}rganization in 1935-36
D,r-eitzer's role was similar .to ·that of Bakayev in- the period.
1933-34.
"Dreitzer ihe'1d in his hands the 'Preparations for ari attempt
on the lives of Stalin and Voroshilov, but I do not know the.details
of these activities."
Sokolnikov: I confirm this.
The President: Did you know that a terrorist group existed in
1935 headed by Zaks-Gladnyev?
Sokolnikov: In a conversation with Radek and Pyatakov, I
would hesitate now to make .it more exact, a mm:n:ber of provincial
groups were mentioned to me. A~ >far as I recall, Pyatakov told
me about them. Such a group was .mentioned and it was said that

ite

164

there was a terrorist group in Leningrad headed by Zaks-Gladnvev.
· The President: The group which was prep:iring an attempt on
the life-of whom?
. Sokolnikov: The group which was preparing an attempt on
the life of Zihdanov. Then there was a group in Siberia headed
by Muralov, which was preparing an attempt, ha<l instructions
to prepare an attempt on the life of Eiche. Besides that, I also
heard at that tinie of the existence of the Byeloborodov group in
Rostov. I do not remember what task it had. Then I learned from
P•atakov that the Ukrainian centre had received terrorist comn{issions. Of the members of this group Loginov an<l somebody
else were mentioned to me.
The President: During the preliminary investigation you mentioned the name of Schleifer.
Sokolnikov: 'Ilhere was Goluibenko.
The President: Did you hear of the existence and activiities oi
the Ukrainian terrorist group from Pyatakov, or from someb(){fy
else?
Sokolnikov: Yes, I heard of it from Pyatakov.
The President: Now, was there any terrorist group under your
own personal direction?
SokQlnikov: As a member of the centre I was directly approached by Tivel on the instructions of Zaks-Gladnyev.
The President: Can the conclusion be <lrawn from this that the
Zaks-Gladnyev group was under your personal direction, since
you were approached for advice?
Sokoln'iko1J: I did not direct its operations, but I personally
sanctioned the continua<t,ion of its adivities.
TfJ.e Pres'ident: How many times, and when, did you have conversations with the representative of this Zaks-Gladnyev group'!
Sokolnikov: In the beginning of 1936, the spring of 193li,
The President: Thus, in the spring of 1936, in the period of
y<>ur "wavering," you were personally connected with the activities of a 'terrorist group, with the group ·which was preparing fill
attempt on the life of Comrade Stalin?
.
Sokolnikov: I was personally connected with Tivel, Tivel was
personally cQIJllwcled with 1.he Zaks-Gladnyev group. Whether
Tivel himself was a member of tllis group, I do not know.
Tlze President: Did you kno'v of the preparations in 1934 for
the assassination of Comrade Kirov? Did you know who were the
members of the terrorist centre which p~epared and carried out
the assassination of Comrade Kirov?
Sokolnikov: I knew in the beginning of the autumn, or. tbr.
end of the_ summer of 1934, I cannot say definitely, that an at:-

165

tempt on the life of Kirov was being prepared in Leningrad. As
to who was to carry it out, that I di·d not know. I was not informed about the ·details of this affair. But in 1932 I heard who
the members of the Leningrad centre were.
The President: Thus, you confirm your testimony that you
knew of the exist·ence in Leningrad of the terrorist centre, and in
particular, that the members of this centre were Levin, Koto'1ynov,
Mandelstamm and others. You confirm this?
Sokolnikov: Yes, I confirm it, I knew that in 1932.
The President: Did you know that the preparations for the
terrorist act against Comrade Kirov were -carried out under Bakayev's personal direction?
·
Sokolnikou: I was not told about that diif'ectly, but I knew
that the direction of the preparation of a terrorist act was entrusted
to Bakayev.
The President: To what extent were you conn~ted with Rei11gold and his activities?
Sokoln"ikou: Reingolid directed the terrorist groups jn l\foscow.
I used to meet him, but he gave me no information about his work.
About the functions that he was -carrying out I learned from Kamenev.
The President: Reingold had more direct connections with y<m
than with Kamenev?
·
·
·
Sokolnikou: But he gave me no inf()l1:Illa.f.ion about his activities.
The President: Rein-gold frequently visited you and discus5ed
things with you more than he did with Ramenev. How;is it that
you did not know a:bout his activities?
~ --Sokoln"ikou: I met him, but he gave me no information about
his terrorist activities, and I cannot testify to the details of his
work.
The President: If you did not know the details of Reingold's
terrorist activities, how is it you knew such a detail as the fact that
in November 1934 Bakayev went to Leningrad personally to prepare the murder of Comrade Kirov?
·
Sokolnikov: I ha,d no connection whatever with i!he prenarritions for the murder of Kirov except that, as a member of the
organization, I bear responisibility for all the iactions and all th~·
crimes cornmirtted by the o'l'ganiza.f!ion. The reason wh-y- I --kne.w_
about Bakayev is that Kaimenev mentioned him to ane. I had
known Bakayev for a long fime, and evilldently Kamenev, in con·
ver.sation with me, mentioned h1m.
Tlze President: Thus, Kamenev informed you at lhat time, in
1934, that in N oyember ·1934 Bakayev was going to Leningrad in
order to ·prepare a terrorist act agamst Kirov?
166

Sokolnikov: I will not undertake to say that this was in
Kovember. I think that was an error in my original testimony.
In the beginning of the autumn Kamenev informed me about
this, :md evidently mentioned Bakayev. I cannot recall any later
conYersation. I received thiis information from Kamenev.
The President: In your testimony of August and September
you speak vaguely about your connection with the united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre. According to one statement it appears that
you were a member of this centre, but in another statement you
deny iL Did you regard yourself as a member O!f the united centre
to which Zinoviev, Kamenev andi others beloniged?
Sokolnikov: No, evidently that is a technical error. I was
never a member of the united centre. From the very outset I wac;
selected, appointed and gave my consent to becoming a member
of the reserve centre. I did not take part in any _of the decisicms
of the united centre, and was never a member of the united centre.
As far as I -remember, when I was confronted with Kamenev; he
also said that I was not a member of the united centre.
The President: But you stood close to and were informed about
the activities OJf the united centre?
Sokolnikov: I was intimate with Kamenev, and he informed
me about some of the actions of the united centre. He partly informed me post f actum.
The President (to Vyshinsky): Have you any questbns?
Vyshinsky: In connection with your last question. (To Sakolnikov.) When you were confronted with Kamenev, how 'was the
question of your participation in the bloc put?·.
Sokolnikov: Kamenev stated that he hadi had conversations
v.'ith me in the summer of 1932, that they did not want <to put me
on the united centre because they thought it was necessary to
preserve me, sinoe I enjoyed the confi.denc.~ of the Party and the
government, held a responsible post, had not been exposed, so that
I could be utilized in the event of the unci.ted centre being exposed.
As far as I rememher, Kamenev said then that this was precisely
why I <lid not go on the united centre hut was selected1 for the reserve centre; and this corresponds with the facts.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, you were included a.gainst the event
of exposure?
·· Sokolnikov: ~gainst the event of the united centre being exposed. But I took no part whatever in its activ!itie.s, and testified
to that at the preliminary investigation.
.
Vyshinsky: Does this testimony of Kamenev's correspond with
the facts?
Sokolnikov: Yes. I can say categorically that I was not a melll~
her of the united centre and did not take part in its activities.
T67

Fysliinsky: I have no more que;;tions to Soko1nikov. I ask
the court to refer to Vol. VIII, page 45, containing Kamenev's testimony and his reply to the question put to him by the examining
official concerning negotiations about Sokolnikov taking part in
the criminal activities of the bloc, where Kamenev's testimony is
worded as follows:
·
"In conversations with Zinoviev we became convinced that
it was necessary . to create a leading group of lhe TrotskyiteZ·inovievite organization in the event of our being exposed. It
was precisely in this ieonll!ection that I condudcd negotiations
with Sokolnikov and obtained his full consent." Do you confirm
this?
Sokolnikov: Yes, that is correct.
Vysliinsky: I have no more questions.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: \Ve will now proceed to examine Serebryakov.
Accused Serebryakov, do you confirm the testimony you have
given?'- .
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vysliinsky: Tell me, please, when did you resume your antiSoviet cr1minal activities?
Serebryakov: In the autumn of 1932. Mrachkovsky came t<>
see me and informed me about the creation of a TrotskyiteZinovieviite fJloc, told me who were the menroers of this centre,
and then informed me that the centre had decidedJ to create a
reserve centre in the event of it-5 being exposed_
"""·
Vyshinsky: \Vhat was your attil!ude towards this propo~l!..l?
Serebryakoi>: It did not come as a surprise to me. Although"I
had retired from the counter-revolutionary activities of Trotskyism, nevertheless, I retained counter-revolutionary sentiments, notwithstanding the declaration I sent in in 1929.
Vysliinsky: \Vhen you sent in your declaration. in 1929 you
had reallv remained a Trotsk\·ite?
Sereb;yokov: Yes, at heart I temained a Trotskyite. In th~
autumn of 1933 I met Pyatakov in Gagri and he urged me then
to take ·an active part in Trotskyite work. In particular, he told
me that he was conducting wrecking activities ,jn industry and
that he was also confronted with the task of developiag__)y_r~!.'.king_
work on the railwavs.
I am an old ~ailway man, I had retained my connections,
I raised no <>hjections and I urud~rtook thiis part of the work, and
it was on these lines that I came to an arrangement with Pyatakov. In addibion, I undertook to maintain connection1 1with and
direct the work in Georgia through Mdivani.
_
168

In 1934, per:haps at the end of 1933, on my arrival in Moscow,
I went to the People's Commissariat of Railways and there saw

A. M. Arnoldov. I had known him in 1926 .and 1927. He expressed
complete readiness to take it upon himself to carry out and direct
wrecking adivities on the railway's. We set ourselves a very
concrete and definite task: to disrupt freight traffic, to reduce daily
loadings by inorcasing the runs af empty cars, by refraining from
increasing the very low running norms for cars and engines, and
by refraining from making full use of the traction power and
capacity of engines, and so forth.
In 1934, on Pyatakov's proposal, Liv~hitz came to see me at
the Central Road and Motor Transport Administration. He was the
Chief of the Southern Railway. I informed him about my conversation with Arnoldov. He informed me that on the Southern Railway
he had an assistant, Zol"in, who could develop this aotivity. In
193-! also, I recruited for wrecking activity on the railways the
Chief of the Tomsk Railway, Miron<W, whom I had known in the
People's Comm.issairiat of Railways in 1926-27. He too agreed to
take part in wrecking activities. In 1934 I had information that
Fufryansky, who wa<; employed at the People's Commiissariat of
Railways, and also Yemshanov, Deputy Chief of the MoscowDonbas Railway, had been enlisted. Knyazev was ail.so mentioned
as a member of the organization.
·
lu-1935, when L. M. Kaganovi~h took charge of the I"arrlway5,
and apprehenSioris arose in my mind a!bout the possibility of
the whole group being exposed, Arnoldov reassrured me and said
that ti.lie wreoking activities on the 1railways were very well
camoufla:ged by those "norms of ours." The "rriaximum norms'~
had, so to speak, received right of citizenship on the railways.
Although the "maximum norms" had received right of ciitzenship,
Kaganovich exposed a:ll that.
Arnoldov not only carried out this work himse1f, but he_ was
also assisted by the theoreticians of these "maximum norms."
among whom were people other than members of the organization. He was connected with them in some way or another. He
did not tel( ine their nanies. Kaganovich dJjsmissed Arnoldov after
the "maximum norms" people were exposed. Then Arnoldov told
me that Livshitz was to be appointed Assistant People's Commissar
of Railways, and he proposed that all the contacts on the railways
be pas.s€.d
to him.
.
This iri brief is approximately all I can say about wrecking
activities on the railways.
·
·
In 1934 Md:ivani came to Moscow and expressed the wish to
meet me and Pyatakov. And so, on f1 week day, after office
hours, we went to Tverskaya Street; opposite the Post Office

on

169

there is a little restaurant, and there our conversation took place.
:1\ldivani reported that the work was developing, that they
had drawn up a list of names for a centre, and asked for our
sanction.
\Ve ,Jrnew three of the men-M·clivani, Kavtaradze and Misha
Okudjava-but two-Chikhladze and Niko Kiknadze-we did
not kn-0w at all, neither I nor Pyatakov. Mdivani described them
to us as old Trotskyitcs and very mi1itant, and a:sked that we sho"'.
them some confidence. We raised no objection, and by that, as it
were, endorsed the centre.
The question of committing a terrorist act against Beria was
raised, !but Pyatakvv and I advised them not to do it. We argued
that a terrorist a.ct against Beria might interfere with the terrorist act against Stalin. \Ve proposed that, if the forces were _available, they should prepare a terrorist act against Stalin, whil~
continuing with their preparations for a terrorist act against Beria.
Vyshinsky: While c-0ntinuing?
Serebryakov: While continuing. \Ve advised them in every
way not lo commit the act against Beria before the Je!TOrist act
against Stalin lhad been committed.
Vyshinsky: Hence, in 1934, you and Pyatakov came to an
agreement with Budu Md:ivani about a pilan of terrorist acts and
about carrying them out.
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You agreed among yourselves that it was necessary to co-ordinate these operations?
Serebryakov: Y ~s, that the Georgian terrorists could _form a
group and could undertake the organization an<l preparation of
a terrorist act.
~- ---Vyshinsky: In Moscow?
Serebryakov: No, over lhere--0:utside of Moscow.
Vyshinsky: Did Budu l\Idivani agree- to this?
Serebryakov: He agreed.
Vyshinsky: And what about t!he attempt on the life of Comrade Beria?
Serebryakov: It was not abandoned, nor were the preparations ~bandoned; it was suspended.
Vyshinsky: In order to co-ordinate the operations?
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Hence, I right1y understand that, instead--of one
attempt at assassination whic:h Mdivani proposed, you proposed
two attempts?
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: This \vas in 1934?
Serebryakov: In 1934. Now in regard to the terrorism connected
17(}

with Georgia it may be added that when I met Pyatakov again
in 1935, our discussion culminated with the question of making,
preparations for yet another terrorist act, namely against Yezhov.
Vyshinsky: \Vas this also connccled with the Georgian terrorists? _
Serebryakov: Yes, with the possibHity of lhefr detailing a
group to be sent here, to Moscow, to prepare for, organize and
execute this terrorist act. This was in the middle of 1935.
Vyshinsky: Did you tell Pyatakov this?
Serebryakov: Budu Mdivani was in Moscow after that. I put
this question to him. He said that Chekvadze had charge of terrorist activities there and that he had assigned this task to Chekvadze. As soon as the group was organized, he promised to send
word to me in Moscow, but I did not see him after that.
· Vyshinsky: You did not see him?
Serebryakov: No.
Vyshinsky: So you know nothing about the further developments?
Serebryakov: I do not. I had two more meetings with Ra<dekin December 1935 and in January 1936. At that time I received
information from him about the letter and about Pyatakov's journey to see Trotsky, and at that time I received the following impression.
At all events it is unquestionable that Radek was in a perplexed state of mind and was at a loss as to how to define his
position; this perplexity affected me too. It is not a matter or
what is stated in the indictment. The indictment correctly -formulates all the questions and puts them correctly. But inasmuch as
the reserve centre did not think out the problems seriously, deeply
and in an organized way, and Trotsky did the thinking for it,
presenting the results to the reserve centre in concentrated form,
it is natural that this produced a psychological shock, and perplexity was bound to ensue. And then Ra<lek-I agreed with him
in this-decided that >it was necessary to call a conference. After
that I did not see either Radek or Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: And what was the object of calling a conference?
Serebryakov: In order, for_ once, to ponider over all these problems seriously and deeply.
Vyshinsky: \Vas it decided beforehand what line this conference was to take?
Sere-bryakov: It was not deoided, but everybody felt very bad
about it.
Vyshinsky: Everybody was feeling very bad about it and th~
line had not been decided?

171

Serebryal.:ou: The agenda and or:ganization of the conference
were decided upon beforehand, but from conversation with Radek
one gathered the impression that he did not take to the idea, or did
so with reluctance. Of course, Ra<lek might have arrived at this
same conclusion from my reply, but there was no decision taken
beforehand. That seems to be all, in the main.
·
Vyshinsky: That is all?
Serebryakou: Yes.
Vyshinsky: ·what about the bloc of the Georgian Trotskyites
with the r\fensheviks and nationalists?
Serebryakou: I was in a hurry, because I wanted to be brief,
and did not tell about that. I think I have already said that. the
organization gave instructions.
.
Mdivani was instructed to raise the question of the possibility
of unimng with the Das'hnaks in Anmenia, with the Mussavatists
in Azerbaijan and w:ith the Georgian Mensheviks in Georgia.
Vysh'insky: What, concretely, wia..s d_one to carry o.ut· fhi~
decision?
Serebryakov: At the end of 1935 Mdivani informed me that
with the Dashnaks andl :Mussavatists he had only found some
contacts, \but with the Mensheviks he had concluded an agreement.
The basis of the contact with the Mensheviks was the agreement
that Georgia was to obtain predominant influence in Transcaucasia.
Vyshinsky: Georgia would subordinate Armenia and· Azeibaijan to her influence?
Serebryakov: Yes. She was to he an independent st~e playing the leading role in Transcaucasia.
"'
. . . ___
Vyshinsky (to Livshitz): Does Serebryakov's evidence con~
c;erning connections with you, accused Livshitz, call for any re7
mark?· AU that Serebryakov has said-was it really so?
· Livslzitz: Yes, 1t "\\as so.
The President: Tell me, accused Serebryakov, did Pyatar
kov in 1935 tell you that it was necessary to enlarge the network
of terrorist or.ganizati.ons on the railways?
. Serebryakov: Not Pyatakov, but Livshitz told me referring to
what Pyatakov had said.
T lze President: During that conversation, did Livshitz point
out the special importance of your work during ~he __ pr.er
mobilization pei-fod? In :your testimony you say: "Livshitz and
I discussed the matter and came to the conclusion that iri addi,
tic>.n to the actions of the organizations in the centre and in the
provinces, the effect of which would be to cause confusion artd
cl;ia{)s on: the railways, it was also necessary to ehsute the pDssibiHty of blocking the most important railway junctions/ in ,the
1?2

first days of mobilization by creating on them sµch jams as would
lead to the dislocation of the transport system and reduce the
capacity of the rnilway junctions." _Do you confhm this?
Serebryakou: Yes.
The President: Further: "Livshitz and I then tried to figure out
which junctions should become the objects of our .work. . . ,"
Serebryakou: That must. not be divulged.
The President: I continue: " . . . On these grounds Livshitz
and I considered which junctions should become the objects of
our undermining work, considering that undermining activities
should be developed at such and such points.
" Do you con~
finn this?
Serebryakou: Yes, I COIJ.<firm it.
The President: Accused Livshitz, do you confirm the conversation you had with Serebryakov on this subject?
Liushitz: I confrrnn the conversation.
The President: I am not talking about the junctions. J·.ask
you whether you had a conversation with Serebryakov about
having to cause jams at a number of railway junctions in the premobilization period.
Liush"itz: 11h€'re w3JS such a conversation.
The President: When did that conversation with Serebryakov
take place?
Livshitz: In 1935.
The President: That conversation arose out of Pyatakov's in,
stiuctions?
Livsbitz: Yes.
The President: Accused Pyatakov, do you confirm· that_ you
gaye Livshitz such instructions?
Pyatnkov: Yes, of course.
The President: Accused Serebryakov, do you confirm this
sentence in one of the statements in your testimony (concerning what Pyatakov said): ""'Wrecking in industry musrt be combined with undermining activity on the railways-this is what
must be done if we want to strike a shattering tblow at the Stalin
leadership"?
Serebryakou: Yes, approximately.
The President: Accused Pyatakov, do you confirm that you
gave Livshitz such instructions?
Pyatnkov: Yes, of course.
Vy$hinsky: Aocused Serebryakov, what connection 'had ac~used Knyazev with this, your anti-Soviet work on the railways?
Serebryakau: Abouil: Knyazev I only heard from Arnoldov
that he was a memberr of the organization, hut Arnoldov could
not tell me who recruited him, or how 'he appeared on the scene.

173

Vyshinsky: But during lht> preliminary investigation you
spoke more precisely and definitely about Knyazev.
Sercbryakov: I testified that An10ldov had informed me about
the member of the organization, Knyazev, but A:rnoldov had not
told me .definitely who h:::d recruited him.
Vyshinsky: Your words where you say tihat "breakidowns,
train wrecks, idle engines, bad repairs and so forth, were all
brought about by"-you mention names and go on to say-"also
by Knyazev direcfly through his people, members of the organizati.on"-diid you know this yourself, or did you hear it from
Arnoldov?
Serebryakov: Yes, from Armlildov.
Vyshinsky: And you had no direct connections W!ith Knyazev?
Serebryakov: No.
Vyshinsky: Do you know wfho of those near to the centre was
directly connected with Knyazev?
Serebryakov: No. I do not know.
Vyshinsky: Accused Liv..shitz, were you closely cormected with
Knyazev in this work?
·
Livshitz: I was.
Vyshinsky: \Vere you connected inid'iV'idually, on your own
initiative, or was this connedion maintained through the centre.
from Serebryakov?
Livshitz: As far as I remember, it was Serebryakov who told~
me that Knyazev was working.
Vyshinsky: Hence, to a certain extent you were connected with
Knyazev through your connections with Serebryakov? ~
Livshitz: Yes.
"'
~-Vyshinskg (to Serebryakov): Don't you recall this?
Serebryakov: No.
Vyshinsky: But you spoke to Livshitz about Knyazev?
Serebryakov: Yes, I told him what Arnoldov said.
Vyshinsky: Hence, Rnyazev took part in this undermining"
activity?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vi!h you, or alone?
Livshitz: In the last period I had two conversations with him
on this subject.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat does "the last period" mean?
---·- __ .
LilJshitz: The period in which I worked in Moscow.
Vysbinsky: \Vhat does "the last period" mean?
Livshitz: 1935-36.
Vyshinsl;y: Hence, already in 1935-36 you had meetings
with Knvazev connected with your criminal activity?
. Livshitz: Yes.
·
174

Vyshinsky: \Vhat was the character of these meetings, what
were they arranged for, what called the-m forth?
Livshitz: The first meeting was called forth by the necessity
of C\tablishing connections.
Vyshinsky: And the second?
Liushitz: During the second meeting we talked about what was
being done and what had to be done.
Vyshinsky: Did Arnoldov correctly descr,ibe Knyazev's participation in this undermining, wrecking and every other kind of
activity on the railways?
Livshitz: Correctly.
Vyshinsky: Diid you discuss Knyaze-v's work on the railways
with Serebryakov apart from what he told you about Knyazev?
Livshitz: As far as I remember, no.
Vyshinsky: Henoe, the only information you obtained from
Serebryakov was what you obtained in the first convPJfsation
about Knyazev; after that you were connected with the latter
directly?
·
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky (to Serebryakov): Is that right?
Serebryokov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I have no more quesfams.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
Cozmsel for Defence: (Reply iin the negative.}
The President: The Court is adjourned until 11 a.m.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegimn of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

175

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, JANUARY 25, 1937, 11.00 A. M.

Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: The session is resumed. vVe shall proceed to the
examination of the witness Loginov. (To the Comma11dant}
Please ask witness Loginov to come in.
(Witness Loginov enters the Court.)
The President: Is your name Loginov?
Loginou: Yes.
The President: Vladimir Fyodorovich?
Loginou: Yes.
.
The President: Your last position was that of manager of the
Coke Trust in Kharkov?
·
Loginou: Yes.
The President: You have been summoned .as witness. in the
trial o.f Radek, Pyatn:kov and others.
Vyshinsky: What do you know about Pyatakov's Trotskyite
underground activities?
Loginov: I met Pyatakov in the beginning of 1928. I had been
.expelled from the Party ~t the time and sent to Verkhnekl'dinsk.
I travelled with Livshitz and Golubenko. In Moscow we went"'to
see Pyatakov to receive instructions as to what we should do.
Pyatakov's directives were that apparently in the near future
we \vould have to submit a double-dealers' statement to the effect
that we had broken \vith the opposition, so as to get back into the
Party and thus secure the opportunity of again rallying the
Trotskyite cadres and continuing the struggle against the Party.
Vyshinsky: In what year \Vas that?
Loginov: It was in the beginning of 1928.
Vyshinsky: Had you known Pyatakov before that?
Loginov: Before that I knew Pyatakov from the time he returned from emigration abroad, approximately from Apfir1917: ·Vyshinsky: Under what social and political conditions and
circumstances did you know him in 1917?
Loginou: I knew him in 1917 as the leader of the Kiev orga~­
ization.
Vyshinsky: vVhat do you know about Pyatakov's position with
176

cegard to the seizure of power in October Hl17 and with regard to
the Constituent Assembly?
Loginov: I have known Pyatakov's position since he returned
from abroad, where he had lived as a political e;x:ile. Pyatakov at
that time actively opposed Lenin's theses on the slogan of "Power
to the Soviets."
Vyshinsky: Do you know whether before that he had opposed
Lenin on the subject of the right of nations to self-determination?
Loginov: I know that in 1915-16 Pyatakov repeatedly opposed
Lenin on the question of the right of nations to se)l-determination.
Vyshinsky: Go on.
Loginov: 1 knew Pyatakov in the period of the struggle against
the German occupation in 1918-19. I was sent by Pyatakov to do
underground work in Kharkov, and then, in UH8, to do underground work in Odessa. For years after this I met Pyatakov very
rarely and met him again only in 1928.
Vyshinsky: Did you follow Pyatakov's a<llvice about submitting
a deceitful statement?
·
Loginov: It was agreed with Pyatakov that if the struggle
should assume a protracted character he him.self would submit
a statement to the effect that he had broken with the opposition
and this was to be a signal for the filing of similar statements by
us in the provinces. That is what we did; that is to say, when Pyatakov ·published a statement of this kind, we in the provincesmyself, Golubenko and Livshitz-submitted a statement that we
associated ourselves with Pyata'kov's :Statement, and. we were reinstated into the Party.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): Do you confirm this testimony
of the witness?
Pyatakov: I confirm it as regards the facts.
Vyshinsky: I am interested in the factual side of the testimony
of the witness Loginov. Do you confirm this?
Pyatakov: Loginov, Golubenko and Livshitz came to see me in
January 1927 and we spoke about submitting a statement. That
is in accordance with the facts. Since this was in January, and I
had not yet made up my mind, I told them that we must refrain
for the present from submitting a statement and must think it over.
I said nothing a!bout a policy of deliberate duplicity.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, Loginov is stating his subjective
view of the matter?
Pyatakou: It is an interpretation of !my words in the light of
the subsequent years. I made up my mind to submit a stat~ment
in January 1928.
,
Vyshinsky: You submitted the statement !for the purpose of
1
duplicity?

177

Pyatakov: Duplicity wasn't my purpose, but inasmuch as I had
not revealed to U1e Party my accomplices, the concealed Trotskyites, and inasmuch as I still harboured dissent on internal Party
questions, in particular on the question of the repressions against
the opposition . . . .
Vyshinsky: Did you say that?
Pyatakov: In that sense I did not express myself fully.
Vyshinsky: And in that sense your conduct was one of doubledealing?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky (to Loginov): I want to ascertain, was there at that
time any talk of duplicity, or not? Loginov, you affirm that there
was?
Loginov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Pyatakov, you deny it?
Pyatakov: I spoke from the standpoint of high treason-the
crime which I committed. What is the sense for me to deny what
actually happened?
Vyshinsky: I am not forcing this opinion on you, all I want is
to ascertain the facts.
Loginov: After that I met Pyatakov in 1931 in Berlin, where I
had gone to place orders for coking industry equipment.
Vyshinsky: Who proposed that you should go there?
Loginov: The Coke Industry Syndicate.
Vyshinsky: Who was at the head of this syndicate?
Loginov: Rataichak.
Vyshinsky: That is, it was Rataichak who proposedA!?
Loginov: Yes.
~-> __
Vyshinsky: \Vas Rataichak connected with you in Trotskyite
underground activities?
Loginov: He was not connected with me, but I had already had
a number of conversations with him and he was at that time in,
full agreement with me on a number of questions of an anti-Party'
character.
·
Vyshinsky: And anti-Soviet?
. Loginov: And anti-Soviet.
Vyshinsky: Did Rataichak regard you as a man he could trust?
Loginov: I regarded Rataichak as a future reliable worker in'
our anti-Party activities.
--- - -- - - -Vyshinsky.' Did you have any meetings when you were abroad?
Loginov: I had a number of meetings with Pyatakov. During
one of these meetings Pyatakov asked about the state of mind of
the former Trotskyites whom Pyatakov knew very well, such
people as Kotsyubinsky and Livshitz.
178

Pyatakov then put it to me that it was necessary to restore the
Trotskyite organization. At a subsequent meeting Pyatakov said
that henceforth the principal form of struggl~ must be terrorist
activity; and Pyatakov added that this was not his own personal
viewpoint, but the viewpoint of Trotsky.
Vyshinsky: Did Pyatakov tell you against whom the terrorist
acts were to be aimed?
Loginov: Yes, Pyatakov said that a terrorist act must be aimed
first and foremost against Stalin.
At later meetings Pyatakov told me that in accordance with
Trotsky's instructions, definite elements of organization must be
brought into this whole struggle. Pyatakov .suggested the formation
of a Trotskyite centre in the Ukraine consisting of Kotsyubinsky,
Golubenko, Livshitz and myself.
Vyshinsky: In what year was that?
Loginov: It was approximately in the summer of 1931.
Vyshinsky: Did you have meetings with P.yatakov _after 1931,
where, when and what were the subjects of the meetings and cnaversations?
Loginov: After 1931 I met Pyatakov at the end of 1932. I informed Pyatakov that the Uk.rainian centre had been formed consisting of the people Pyatakov had named, and that we had already .started underground activities in the Ukraine. Pyatakov then
told me that in accordance with Trotsky's directives, the Trotskyites and Zinovievites had already actually united, mainly on the
basis of terrorist activities, and that in Moscow the work had already assumed fairly wide dimensions. He proposed that we in the
Ukraine too should stop talking about terrorism and proceed to
practical action .
. Vyshinsky: Who proposed this to you?
Loginov: Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: When did he propose it?
Loginov: He proposed it to me at the end of 1932.
Vyshinsky: At the end of 1932. Did he in this connection refer
to the receipt of any new instructions from Trotsky, or was he
acting on the basis of previous instructions?
Loginov: At that time he had received no new instructions from
Trotsky. These were transmitted at .subsequent meetings. I did not
see Pyatakov in 1933. In 1932, when I began to inform Pyatakov
about the situation in the Ukraine, he told me that he had during
this period seen Kotsyubinsky, Livshitz and Golu.benko and that
he was more or less acquainted with the situation in the Ukraine.
Vyshinsky: Had he seen them himself?
Loginov: Yes, he had already seen them i~ the ~ourse o.f 1932.
1

179

Vyshinsky.' He did not confine himself to the connections with
you, but extended these connections?
Loginov: These connections were not confined lo me; he was
also connected \vith Livshilz, Kotsyubinsky and Golubenko, of
which I also knew.
Vyshinsky: This was in 1933?
Loginov: I did not see Pyatakov in 1933, because I was not
in Moscow and had no opportunity of meeting Pyatakov even
once.
Vyshinsky: Did you know that Pyatakov had again been abroad
in 1932?
Loginov: Yes, I learned about it in 1934 when I met Pyatakov.
Pyatakov informed me of a number of entirely new instructions
from Trotsky. He expressed dissatisfaction over the fact that our
ierrorist struggle was still being confined to general talk. Pyatakov
said it was to terrorism that chief attention must be devoted, and
that one man who acts was far more valuable than a number of
wide organizations. Pyatakov further said that the prestige of the
Central Committee and the confidence its policy enjoyed in the
country had grown considerably, and that Trotsky was therefore
demanding very insistently that the efforts to discredit the policy
carried out iby Stalin should be intensified.
Pyatakov especially pressed and emphasised the point that in
this respect a particularly great role must fall to us-to people
working in industry. It was in industry above all that we must
employ all means to discredit the policy of Stalin. We mus~ employ
all means to slow down the rapid growth and development of
fodustry which in 1934 was already evident to every citizen otffie·
Soviet country. At the same period Pyatakov raised! the question
of. . . .
Vyshinsky: In the same conversation or at the same period?
Loginov: In that very conversation. It was in the spring of 1934.
These were not quite such perfectly clear and perfectly exact instructions as I received during my meeting with Pyatakov in 1935
concerning wrecking and undermining activities; but this was, so
to speak, the first step towards adopting this course.
At the same period Pyatakov pointed out that in th_~ iit~_!lggle
against the Soviet state we must not rely on our internal force-s
alone, that these forces would hardlv be sufficient. I remember
this was how i?yatakov put it, pointing out that this was just how
Trotsky thought, that we couM not, ithat it was impossible to rely
013; the workers and proletarian masses within the country, that we
ol-ught, therefore, to try to enlist large numbers of engineers
180

in our work. I pointed out at that time that \Ve would hardly be
able to attract the younger generation who had been brought up
under the Soviet power; main attention must be devoted not to the
young engineers but to the older ones, especially those who had
taken part in the struggle against the Soviet power in the rn:::0-31
period. Pyatakov pointed out that since we did not enjby particularly wide support and would not be able to address a large
public owing to our being in illegal conditions, we ought, therefore,
to rely on help from foreign powers. And here he told me that in
this respect we could reckon on help and .support from Germany
and Japan.
Vyshinsky: This conversation was in 1934?
Loginov: Yes. These statements were repeated by Pyatakov in
1935 in a considerably more precise and clear form.
At the beginning of the summer of 1935 Pyatakov asked me
whether we were really prepared for a terrorist struggle. I replied
that we were, that we-the Ukrainian centre-had selected a number of people who had agreed to perform terrorist acts. These persons were prepared and were only awaiting the signal from the
centre. Pyatakov said that the Trotskyite parallel centre was now
preparing a simultaneous terrorist blow. He said that we must
quite definitely make preparations for terrorist acts against Stalin,
Molotov, Voroshilov and Kaganovich, and in the Ukraine, against
Kossior and Postyshev. I replied that our principal forces were intended for the purpose of committing terrorist acts in the Ukraine,
except for a number of people who were held in readiness in case
of a summons from Moscow.
Vyshinsky: Were there many of them?
Loginov: In Odessa, under Golubenko's leadership, a group
of· people had been organized headed by Kalashnikov which was
preparing to commit a terrorist act against Stalin. In Dniepropetrovsk Zhukov headed a group which was preparing to commit
a terrorist act against Voroshilov.
Vyshinsky: And they were to be transferred to Moscow at the
required moment?
Loginov: Yes, Pyatakov arranged with me about the form,
about the technique. I was to be summoned here to Moscow and to
receive instructions from him.
Vyshinsky: And you mentioned Zhukov and Kalashnikov to
Pyatakov?
Loginov: Yes, I mentioned Zhukov and Kalashnikov to Pyatakov and also the names of other persons who were to take part in
terrorist, acts against the Ukrainian leaders.
VyJhinsky: And did not Pyatakov instruct you to prepare cer181

tain other groups in the Ukraine for attempts on the lives of any
other people?
Loginov: Pyatakov did not give us any other instructians in
regard to this.
Vyshinsky: He gave instructions only in regard to the persons
you have just mentioned?
'
Loginov: Yes, apart from that I did not mention just now
those who were to act in the Ukraine.
Vyshinsky: This was in the summer of 1935?
Loginov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you meet Pyatakov again in the summer of
1935?
Loginov: No, but <luring this same meeting Pyatakov raised the
question not only of discrediting the policy of the Party, but of
definite wrecking and undermining activities on our part, giving
perfectly clear instructions on this matter.
Vyshinsky: What kind of instructions?
Loginov: Instructions to the effect that we must not only wait
untii the time was ripe for the main diversiive activities, which were
to come at the moment of an armed conflict, according to one of
the alternatives, but that we must at once undertake widespread
activities in destroying the achievements of heavy industry, at the
places where we were working. Here I received instructions from
him to commence these activities without delay in the branch
of industry in which I was working-the coke and chemical
industry.
Vyshinsky: You received special instruCtions from himb
Loginov: Yes, special instructions.
.,.___
Vyshinsky: W'hat did Pyatakov instruct you to do in thiS
field?
Loginov: He said that chief attention should be devoted to the
chemical branch of the coke and chemical industry, because it was
of importance for defence purposes. Therefore, Pyatakov said, the
chemical industry must be disrupted by every possible means.
\Ve began to delay the construction and starting of new departments in chemical plants.
In conjunction with Yanovsky, manager of the Coke and Chemical Construction, we arranged new construction work in such
a way that the chemical departments started operations a year or
two later than the coking ovens. This we did in the case of the
Mariupol plant. At this plant too, the coking ovens were started
without a single auxiliary department, that is, without the coal
shed, which made it absolutely impossible to supply coke of a
proper qlj.ality, without the auxiliary workshops, chemical laboratories. and so forth.
182

A system of wrecking measures was applied at the NovoYenakievka coke and chemical plant and at the Krivoy Rog plant.
The temperature there was raised considerably above 1400°
and in this way the regenerators of the coking ovens were fused.
The result of this was that for nearly three months the plant
fulfilled. only 70 per cent of the monthly coke plan, whereas before this the plant had worked well. There was a corresponding
los5 in chemicals, of course. Ami in addition 200,000-300,000 rubles
had to be spent on repairs to restore the regenerators of the coking
ovens. This wrecking act was performed by Situlin and the director of the plant, Kholyavko, and the assistant-director of the ovenheating department was also enlisted. Similar acts were performed
at the Gorlovka Works.
Vyshinsky: And does the Gorlovka Works come under the
same trust?
,
Loginov: It comes under the Coke Trust, which was under my
charge.
Vyshinsky: Let us confine ourselves to your confirming that
wrecking acts took place, or to your denying it. You need rtot tell
us about the details just now. Did you also organize wrecking
activities at the Gorlovka coke plant? .
Loginov: Yes.
The construction of the washing installation at the Staro-Yenakievka coal concentration factory was delayed.
Vyshinsky: Did your organization commit any diversive acts?
Loginov: At Zaporozhye-fusing of the regenerators of the
coking ovens.
Vyshinsky: In what year was that?
_Loginov: In 1935-36. The Zaporozhye affair was at the end
of the summer of 1935.
Vyshinsky: Wrecking arid diversive activities?
Loginov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you meet Pyatakov at the end of 1935 or the
beginning of 1936?
·
Loginov: I met him at the beginning of 1936.
Vyshinsky: Did you learn anything new from him?
Loginov: Yes. Pyahtkov again inquired about the morale of
our active forces and said that far from there being any intention
to discard this aspect of activities, it was now assuming great significanoe.
Vyshinsky: Was there any talk between you and Pyatakov
regarding his latest journey aibroad?
Loginov: Pyatakov said that he had again been abroad in 1935.
183

He said that he had received from Trotsky confirmation of the
directive that cont:tcts with foreigners-fascists in the Soviet Union
-should be established more determinedly than heretofore. Pyatakov told me that there was a very definite agreement between
Trotsky and the fascist organizations in Germany and an agreement
with the ruling circles in Japan on the .subject of joint struggle
against the Soviet power.
Vyshinsky: On what conditions?
Loginov: I questioned Pyatakov in detail as·to what this would
mean and where all this policy would lead to-that we would practically cease to exist as a country. It seemed to me absurd that this
vast country was to be destroyed as a state. He said that it was
not this that was intended, but big territorial concessions both in
the East and in the Ukraine, and that Trotsky had an arrangement
to this effect. Yes, Pyata.kov also spoke about the attitude that we
must adopt in case of armed conflict between the Soviet Union and
the fascist countries, Germany and Japan.
Vyshinsky: Did you say attitude?
Loginov: Yes, attitude. I would say that it was reminiscent of
the attitude of our Party at the time of the imperialist war-a
defeatist policy, although that would not be quite exact.
Vyshinsky: The comparison is quite out of place and there is
no analogy here at all.
Loginov: \.Ve were now to help in every way to bring about
the defeat of the Soviet Union, and our principal activity should
be destruction and diversion, which were to be carried out at that
very period.
~,,,,_ __ .
Vyshinsky: When did he tell you this?
Loginov: He told me this at the beginning of 1936.
Vyshinsky: But did he tell you that this directive was so
monstrous that even he, Pyatakov, was disturbed by it, and did
Pyatakov show signs of any hesitation whether to accept or no¥
to accept this directive?
Loginov: It made me waver.
Vysliinsky: Consequently, it made Pyatakov waver too?
Loginov: I remember the conversation; I drew an analogy with
1917.
Vyshinsky: I am not interested in your analogy. 'Yha!_ J _am
interested in is t0 get a reply to the following question. 'Vhen Pyatakov spoke to you on this subject, did this subject and this mon<;trous attitude disturb Pyatakov? Did it seem to you that he wa~
hesitating on: this point, or did it not seem so to you on this occasion? You said that you vourself were stunned ·by it. But Pvatakov
who conveyed this to you, was he, in your opinion, als; shaker
184

and stunned by it, or not? I request you to give an objective
reply.
Loginov: The impression I got was that Pyatakov was no less.
stunned than I was, but he nevertheless transmitted it as a clear
directive which had to be carried out.
Vyshinsky: The directive had to be carried out, but he was.
disturbed by it?
Loginov: Yes. After all, we had staked everything. To retreat
now was impossible, said Pyatakov, because that would mean annihilation, sheer physical annihilation, and the utter destruction
of all our positions. At the same time, in the way he put the question, and especially when I drew the analogy with the Ukrainian
Central Rada, it could undoubtedly be felt that he was very uneasy.
Vyshinsky: Did Pyatakov at that time telf you that it would be
necessary for a narrow circle of the active Trotskyites to get together, to talk it over, fo discuss this directive and what was to be
done next, what line was to be followed?
Loginov: Pyatakov said something different. v\lhen I myself
began, if I may so express it, to shrink somewhat from this whole
business, Pyatakov stated: "I understand, you are not the only
one who is disturbed by the way the matter is being put. I have
spoken to a number of persons and I have observed the same attitude to this matter." He said that he had spoken to a number of
people on the subject, so that it is possible that a discussion had
taken place, but I cannot say.
Vyshinsky: Pyatakov said nothing to you about a conference
at that period?
·
Loginov: No, he <lid not.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): You said that after rece1vmg the
directive from Trotsky you wanted to get together and discuss
what was to be done next. Did you speak about this to any members of the centre?
Pyatakov: I spoke about it to Radek and Sokolnikov. We intended to call a meeting at first of the centre itself, with the addition of Tomsky. And after, the centre had met to call a meeting of
people who were, if one may so express it, regional organizers.
Vyshinsky: In deciding th.at it should consist of a limited circle
of persons, were you considering the seriousness of the question?
.Pgatakov: It was discussed by Radek, Sokolnikov and myself.
Both Radek and I realized that if this question were submitted
to the active members of the Trotskyite organization it would inevitablv lead to discussion and debate, and in all likelihood to a
split. And so a very limited circle of people i,,as proposed.
185

Vyshinsky: In a word, you didi not want to submit the question for a broad discussion; you were afraid to announce it to
a more or less wide circle of members?
Pyatakov: \Ve first wanted to take counsel in a narrower circle.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions to Pyatakov. I have a
question to Loginov. In what month did your meeting with Pyatakov tin 1936 take place?
Loginov: At the end of February or the beginning of March.
Vyshinsky: And you had no further meetings?
Loginov: I saw Pyatakov but we had no conversations.
l'yshinsky: Is this ail you hav{' to sa:y about .Pyatakov?
Loginov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Now about Rataichak. Tell us, how were you connected with him in your criminal activities? What were your points
of contact with him.?
Loginov: Since Rataicha:k was very well acquainted with the
eoke and chemical industry, I told him about the measures we
were proposing to take.
Vyshinsky: MeaSil.I.fes af a criminaJ. nature?
Loginov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And was Rataichak informed about them?
Loginov: Rataicha.k knew about them from what I told him.
Vyshinsky: And why did you speak to Rataicha.k about your
er,iminal designs?
Loginov: I knew of the big part he was playing within the
ehemkal industry.
Vyshimky: What of that, somebodly else might be playwg the
same part. Why then discard secrecy in this matter? Did
a~~
him for advice?
-"
Loginov: Not that I asked for advice, but I wanted to discuss
a number of questions with him.
Vyshinsky: Questions relating to the chemical industry?
Loginov: Yes. Moreover, I had a number of points of contact
with him.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, although the branch of industrythe coke and chemical-of which you had charge did not come
within his sphere, but had its own independent, parallel relations
with the centre, you had certain points of contact with the chemical
industry which brought you close to Rataichak in your_ym_rk?
Loginov: Yes, we had points of contact in criminal activity.
When the question arose of establishing connections with fascist organizations, I also told Rataichak, as a man who was acquainted with the personnel in the coke an<l chemical industry,
th'ai Pyatakov had told me to get in touch with the German engineers working in the coke and chemical industry; but there were

you

186

no such engineers now; they had been here in 1931-32 but had
nearly all left the coke and chemical industry at the beginning of
1933. I mentioned the name of one German technician with whom
I proposed to establish connections. I told Rataichak that he ought
to have a talk with Hrasche whom I did not know but had heard
about from Moskalyov.
Vyshinsky: Then, we have a perfectly definite fact: you and
Rataichak discussed the question of drawing into wrecking activities-w horn?
Loginbv: As to myself; I suggested the German specialists
working in the Gorlovka Works, and I knew that Hrasche had connections . . . .
Vyshinsky: From whom did you know it?
Loginov: From Moskalyov.
Vyshinsky: And to whom did you speak about Hra.sche?
Loginov: To Rataichak.
Vyshinsky: And it turned out that Rataicb.ak knew Hrasche, or
did he not?
Loginov: He knew him, because he was working in the same
branch of industry.
Vyshinsky: What did Rataichak tell you about Hrasche?
Loginov: He did not tell me anything, because I did not return
to the subject any more and I do not know how he established
~nnection with him.
Vyshinsky: Did he himself tell you that he had such connections?
Loginov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Of a legal or illegal nature'?
. Loginov: IlJegal.
l'yshinsky: Illegal connections with whom?
Loginov: Hrasche. He worked in the chemical industry and he
was connected with and knew a number of German engineers.
I s;iid that I ha:d heard from Moskalyov that this man might be
useful in e-Stablishing connections between Rataichak and some
German intelligence service agents. It was this th::i.t I discussed
with Rataichak. But whether he subsequently established connections with German intelligence service agents through Hrasche I do
not know.
Vyshinsky: What did you say to Rataichak about connections
with Hrasche and foreign intelligence service agents?
Loginoi>: I told him that it was our task to establish connections with foreign intelligence service agents.
Vyshinsky: To whom did you say this?
Loginov: To Rataichak.

187

Vyshinsky: How did Rataichak react to this statement?
Loginov: As a matter of fact, Rataoichak was at that time looking for somebody through -w horn connections could be established with foreign intelligence service-agents, and I drew his attention to Hrasche.
Vyshinsky: Cons1equently, you mentioned Hrasche as a man
through whom might be established-what?
Loginov: Connections with the foreign intelligence service
agents in the U.S.S.R.
Vyshinsky: Comrade President, may I question Rataichak?
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky (to Rataichak): Will you tell us whether you had
such a conversation with Loginov?
Rataichak: Yes, I had.
Vyshinsky: Of the kind Loginov says?
Rataichak: Yes, approximately.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, Loginov told you through whom you
could establish connections with the German intelligence service?
Rataichak: I recall that in the course of the conversation the
question arosie through whom connections could be established
with the German intelligence service. He said it could be done
through a man named Hrasche who had come to work with us
recently and who knew many German engineers.
Vyshinsky: That is, you were interested: in fin<lling a man
through whom connections could be esta:blished with -the German
intelligence service?
Rataichak: Yes.
~
Vyshinsky: And why with the German?
~-- _
Rataichak: Loginov told me that he had directives to that effect
from Pyatakov. Soon after, I received the -directives from Pyatakov
myself.
Vyshinsky: AccuiSed Pyatakov, do you confirm this testimony?Pyatakou: In the main, I do.
Vyshinsky: What does "in the main" mean? Does it mean that
you gave fostructions to Rataichak to establish connections with
German intelligence service a.gents?
Pyatakou: I do not recall whether there was any talk of German intelligence service agents, but inaiSmuch as I had conveyed
to Loginov and Rataichak Trotsky's and my own instructions .on
the necessity of their Trotskyite organization linking with
hostile forces in the Soviet Union, I consequently also had this
kind of connection in mind.
Vyslzinsky ~ So you had in mind also the kind of connection
of which Rataichak speaks.
r
Pyatakov: I gave the instruction in a more algebraical forI

188

mulation, in a general form, without being specific, because I also
had in mind the remnants of the former wrecking groups among
the specialists and other. . . .
Vyslzinsky: It is not this that I want to know. I know what you
mean by algebra, but I must now dieal not with algebra but with
facts.
Pyatakov: I cannot be concrete on everything on every occasion. But I confirm this.
Vyshinsky: But please understand me too: I cannot merely
listen, I must also verify.
Pyatakoll: That is why I began by saying that this testimony
is correct.
Vyshinsky: Olaiming that it was on your instructions, Loginov
said that Rataichak asked his advice on how to find a person
through wh<Y!D. connection could be established with German intelligence service agents. Was Rataichak right in referring to you?
Pyatakov. He was.
·
Vyshinsky: Consequently, I may take it that you instructed
Rataichak to look for contacts with German intelligence service
agents.
Pyatakov: I did not say specifically: "Loo!k for a contact with
German intelligence service agents." I did not give such an instruction, but I also had such connections in mind.
Vyshinsky: You had in mind that he woulld look for connections with the German intelligence service?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Now let us continue about Rataichak.
I request the witness Loginov to continue what he has to say
about Rataichak and what he knows of his criminal activities.
Logino1J: Strictly speaking, that is all I have to say.
·vyshinsky: So there t'he matter ended as far as Hrasche was
eoncerned? Apart .from thi·S conversation with Rataichak, did
you have any other <'Onversations regarding specific -criminal ac·
1ions?
Loginov: I had another conversation with Rataichak about
the forms of wrecking activities in the coke and chemical industry.
Vyshinsky: About the forms?
Loginov: The forms.
Vyshinsky: The methods?
Loginov: The methods.
Vyshinsky: TI1e ways?
Loginov: The ways.
Vyshinsky: The means?
Loginov: The means.
Vyshinsky: That is what you call the form?
189

Loginov: Yes. In 1935 I pointed out to him what methods wewere employing with regard to wrecking activities in the coke and
chemical industry. The main thing was delay and disruption byholding up the construction of these plants.
Vyshinsky: We shall not talk about the methods just now.
Loginov: I told him specifically on what collS'truction jobs and_
-in what plants we contemplated carrying out these measures. I
did not encounter-any objection from Rataiohak.
Vyshinsky: Di-d Rataichak give you any advice regarding thiscriminal .activity of yours, or you did not require this?
- Loginov: I d:o not recollect any particular advice.
Vyshinsky: To proceed. Is that all about Rataichak?
Loginov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you talk to Rataichak about tevrorist tasks?·
Loginov: I talked to Rataichak concerning ter,rorist tasks.
pointing out that these taslks had been set before us, before theUkrainian centre. I told him that we were carrying on work accordingly.
VysHinsky: Consequentily, Rata~chalk was inJfoomed about
what?
Loginov: .A:bout my te1Torist adivities in the Ukraine.
Vyshinsky: What else do you knvw ahourt Rataic'hak?
Loginov: That is all.
Vyshinsky: Do you not rec3ll a conversation with Rataichak
about the fact that Pyatakov hald set Rataichak the wrecking task
of holding up the development of the nitrogen industry?
Loginov: Yes, both Rataichak and Pyatakov told me 1itcis.
Vyshinsky: What was said first by Rataic.b.ak and then.,.py
Pyatakov about this matter?
.. Loginov: Pyatakov talked to me about this matter, and pointed>
out that in regard to wrecking work it was intended to carry
out extensive acts of wrecking in disrupting the nitrogen industry
program. I talked to Rataichak about this, inquiredl about the forms
employed in carrying out this work, with a view to adopting these
forms for my own use in the coke and chemical industry, and•
I recall that Rataichak pointed out to me that these were the forms
employed to disrupt the nitrogen industry program-<lisruption of.
construction by diffusing the funds allotted for the nitrogen industry.
Vyshinsky: So you confirm this too?
Loginov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Do you know anything about the criminal activities of Livshitz?
Loginov: \V.hen I came back from Berlin i:n 1931, in latesummer or in early autumn, I met Livshitz and passed on to him
190

the directives I had received from Pyatakov in Berlin. I told Livshitz
that Pyatakov had formed an Ukrainian Trotskyite organization,.
of which Livshitz was to be a member.
In 1932 and 1933 I was conducting joint work with Livshitz
in the Trotskyite underground organization ·in the Ukraine. I
knew about the work which Livshitz had begun to carry out in
Kharkov on the railways. I knew the persons who had been recruited into the Trot:.skyite und~rground organization by Livshitz.
Livshitz agreed with the position on terrorism. He left the Ukraine
in 1933, at a time when we had not yet commenced practical terrorist activities. I met Livshitz again early in 1936, and learnt from
him that he was working quite suocessfully on the railways, that
he was connected not only with the persons whom I had met in
the Ukraine, but that he also had many contacts with other
people.
Vyshinsky: Did Livshitz know of your terrorist work?
Loginov: He knew of the terrorist instructions I had received
from Pyatakov in Berlin.
·
Vyshinsky: And about your practical work?
Loginov: He did not know about the practical work in 1933,
1934, and 1935, hecau.se I did not see him during those three
years.
Vyshinsky (to Llvshitz): Have you any remarks to make on
the testimony of the witness Loginov?
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: Have you any corrections to make?
Livshitz: Small ones, of no importance. The conversation took
place at the beginning of 1932, and not in 1931.
Vyshinsky: But there was such a conversation?
Livshit::,: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And do you confirm the contents?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vgshinsky: I have no more questions.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions to put
to the witness?
Kommodov (to Logfa1ov): In what year did you have your conversation with Rataichak aibout Hrasche?
Loginov: In the latter half of 1934.
Kommodov: The wrecking ads a:baut which you have spoken,
in particular at the Gorlovka Works took place before this conversa.ti~n?

Loginov: That was in 1935.
Kommodov: Did Mos.kalyov mention any other names apart
from Hrasche?
Loginov: No.
191

Vyshinsky: Do you know that Hrasche was implicated in wrecking activities in 1935?
Loginov: No, I do not know, I only know what I have told here.
Vyshinsky: So you only know what you have stated here?
Loginou: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, you indicated Hrasche as a man
with whose aid you couid make connections?
Loginou: Yes, with some German engineers who were undoubtedly acting as intelligence service agents here.
Vyshinsky: You know about this only from Moskalyov's
wor,ds?
Loginou: Yes, from Moskaiyov's words.
Vyshinsky: Permit me to queslion the accused Rataichak.
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky (to Rataichak): After your conversation with Loginov you afterwar'ds got in touch with Hrasche?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, the opinion that Hrasche could make
the connections with German intelligence service agents proved
correct?
Rataichak: It pTOved correct.
The President: Have the accused any questions?
The Accused: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*

*

*

The President: The session is resumed. We will proceed to
examine accused Boguslavsky.
ACC!!IBed Boguslavsky, do you confirtr:n the statemenlf"'S: you
...... -.
made at the preliminary investigation?
Bog'uslausky: Yes, I confirm them.
Vyshinsky: Tell us, what were your criminal Trotskyite activities in Siberia?
Boguslausky: In Si:beria my activities date from tlhe beginning
of February 1928, when I arrived there after 1being expelled from
the Party at the Fifteenth Party Congress. In Novosibirsk, where
I was appointed to work, there were several active Trotskyites
'\Vho had been prominent in the past. There were Muralov, Krol,
Sumetsky, Surnov. In addition, there was Sosnovsky in Barnaul.
Smilga in Minussinsk, and Radek arrived in Tomsk shortly after.
At the end of February 1928 I received directives ·from
Trotsky through Sosnovsky about the formation of the Siberian
Trotskyite underground centre. The tasks which were set before
this centre at that time consisted, in the first place, in doing everything possible to preserve those Trotskyite forces in Siberia whO'
.had not been subjected to any penalties by the government author192

ities or to penalties of a Party nature-expulsion and so forth.
In the second plaee, to unite and direct the underground activities
of the Twtskyites living in various places in Siberia. ·rn the thlrd
place, lo circulate il'legal documents, primarily in the districts
where the exiled Trotskyiles were con~entrated, and finally, to
organize material aid for the Trotskyiites who were living in exile
in Siocria.
This centre was composed of the following members: N. I. Muralov, the leader of the centre, myself-Boguslavsky, Sumetsky,
Krol, Surnov, Sosnovsky, Byelooorodov and, after his arrival,
Radek.
Vyshinsky: Radek was told a'bout this?
Boguslavsky: Yes, he was told. I should add that current
questions not of a fundamoota·l character were decided! by those
members of the centre who resided permanently in Novosibirsk,
whiie questions of a fundamental character were settled by referring them in one way or another to those memlbers -Oif the centre
who did not live in Novosibirsk hut in other districts of ,Si:beria.
I speak about the various ways in which this was dOIIl~. Sometimes members of the centre residing permanently in Novosibirsk
were sent to those places where Sosnovsky, Byeloborodov 'and
Radek were 'living-these were the nearest and most convenient connections for us; as for Minussinsk, where Smilga was,
the latter was not made a mem!ber of the centre. Then there were
the "isits of these persons-Sosnovsky, Byelooorodov and Ra<leklo Novosibirsk, and Susnovsky, for example, came to Novosibirsk
quite frequently. Radek, too, came to NovosibiTsk seveml times,
and so did Byeloborodov. By taking advantage of these visits or by
other methods, we mana:ged to solve this problerrn.
Vysh'inskg: You have enumerated the members of your Siberian centre of 1928. Have you enumerated them a11? And Drobnis,
was he not a member?
Boguslavskg: Drobnis was not a member of the cenitre at that
time. To finish with the centre it should be said that Drnbnis
was a member of the centre in 1934, when he was in Siberia.
Vyshinskg: \Vhom were you connected with in Moscow?
Boguslavsky: In l\foscow this centre was connected with old
man Eltsin up to the time of his arrest.
Vyshinsky: And in 1929? ·
Boguslavsky: In 1929 we had no connections in :Moscow, for
Eltsin was arrested, and we had no other connections.
Vyshinsky: And in 1930?
Boguslavsky: I ought to say that here there was a break in
the work of th~, centre, because. . . .
Vyshinsky: I must make the following point clear: trial pro193

cedurc requires that there should be interrogation; interrogation
consists of questions and of answers to these questions and explanations, after which the accused may say anything they want
to. For the present I will ask you to answer the questions which
interest me, and afterwards .you can put any questions that interest you to anyone you wish. Now I am asking you: Did you
have connections in Moscow in 1929?
Boguslavsky: No, we had no connections.
Vyshinsky: Anid in 1930?
Boguslavsky: We had conn1ections with Ivan Nikitich Smirnov.
Vyshinsky: In what capacity did Smirnov act in his dealings
with you?
Boguslcwsky: In 1930 he acted in the capacity of a man who
enjoyed our cornfi,dence, who haid authority among us ..
Vyshinsky: As an indivii.dual?
Boguslavsky: Yes, as an individual.
Vyshinsky: And in 1931?
Boguslav.c;ky: In 1931 we were allso connected with him, also
as an individual.
·
Vyshinsky: And in 1932?
Boguslavsky: In 1932 I personally and the other members of
the centre maintained connections with Smirnov as a member of
the new centre.
Vyshinsky: ·what centre?
Boguslavsky: The united• Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre i.n Moscow.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, when the Trotskyile-Zingyievii.te
centre was organized, Smirnov, as its representative, got
tous!i
with you?
Boguslavsky: Yes.
Vyshinsky: From whom did you learn that such a centre had
been organized?
Boguslavsky: I learnt it first from Smirnov.
Vyshinsky: And afterwards did you knovv what this centre
was doing?
Boguslavsky: Yes.
Vyshinsky: From whom did you learn this?
Bog'uslavsky: Partly from Smirnov himself, partly from Pyafakov.
Vyshimky: \Vhen did you hear from Pyatakov?
Boguslcwskg: In the beginn!ng of 1932.
Vyshinsky: "\"Vhat was Pyatakov's relation to the united centre?
Bog11slcwsky: He was not a member of the united centre, but
(as I believed) he was inf(')rmed about the work of the united
centre.

irr

194

Vyshinsky: \.Y-hen and where ·did you meet Pyatakov?
Early in 1932, I don't recall in what month-it
must have been in February, in the People's Commissariat of
Heavy Industry, in Pyatakov's private office.
Vyshinsky: You only met him once in 1932?
Boguslavsky: Only onee.
Vyshinsky: Did you meet :him in the following years?
Boguslavsky: Yes
Vyshinsky: \Vhen and where?
Boguslavsky: In 1933 I met him again in the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry, anrd in 1934 in Pyatakov's apartment.
Vyshinsky: And in 1935?
Bog'uslavsky: I d:iid not see him in 1935. My last meeHng with
PyatakO<V was in 1934.
Vyshinsky: Can you reoollect what you talked about with
him in 1932, 1933, and 1934?
Boguslausky: In 1932 Pyatakov informed me aibout the meeting that had taken place in Berlin between Pyatakov, Smirnov
and S'hestov on the one hand and Sedov on tJhe other. He told me
that during these meetings dfrectives had been reooived from
Trotsky switching the work of the Trotskyites on to new lines: tihe
principal method of work was now to be terrorism, that is to say,
the committing of terroris-t acts against tlhe leaders O'f the Party
and the gow~rnment, and moreover, as he told me at that time,
our task was to create a'1l kinds of diffkulties in the economic life
of the Soviet U1I11ion.
Pyatakov's instructions regaroing terrorism did not greatly
surprise me, for I had learnt about this from I. N. Smirnov at
the end o.f 1931. Here I must say something about the formll!ion of the new Siberian centre. This t0ok place in 1932.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat was it about?
Boguslavsky: It happened in connection with the foUowing. In
1929 Smirnov had transmitted Trotsky's directive to us, to the
effect that while not laying down our arms, while not disarming
ideologically, we were to disarm organizationally, to de<clare that
we would put a stop to factional work, and return to the Party,
while preserving in our decla.rations, as far as possible, something
of our old Trotskyite ideas-which is what I. N. Smirnov :and l
actually did. In connection with Trotsky's new directives about
which I am speaking-the directives regarding teITorism were
fransmitted to me by Smirnov and the other part by Pyatakovthe question arose of re-cstn:b1'ishing the Trotskyite Siberian centre in one form or another. Smirnov said outright that this -centre
was to consist of N. I. Muralov, as its leader, myself-Boguslavsky,
Boguslav~ky:

195

and Sumetsky, who were members of the old Trotskyite centre,
since this would ensure continuity in the work.
Later, in 1934, Drobnis was also made a member of the
Siberian centre.
The work in 1932 mostly amounted to re-estahlis.hfog our
lost connections and preparing for the organization of terrorist
acts; the direction of this work was undertaken by the leader
of the centre, Muralov.
At ithe same time I personally was engaged in ascertaining
the possirbility of putting into effed the second part of the directives concerning the creation of so-called! <lifficu'lties for the economic policy of the Soviet government and of the Party. My work
gave me contact with leading men in the economic life of Siberia,
and I was entrusted with this task.
The construction of the .Kuznetsk Metallurgical Works was at
that time in full swing. Accord:in.gly, wrecking activities in indus~
try were. to be conducted· in the Kuzbas, and, simultaneously
'\V'ifih. rf:his, on the rad:lways.
In giving me directives on how to create difficulties in the way
of the economic policy of the Party and the government, Pyatakov said that Shestov, a man well known to him, was working
in the .Kuzbas, and that this Shestov had directives to commence
wrecking activities in the Kuzbas, in the coal mining industry
and on the principal construction jobs.
On returning to Novosibirsk, I told Mm-al<YV about my con~
versation. He conifi.rmed that he really had directives, and.::...suggested that I engaige in carrying on wrecking work on the -rail.,,_
ways. I set about this work then and there. In the same year,
1932, I learned from Muralov that a terrorist group had ibeen
organized in Novosibirsk under the leadership of Khodoroze, and
that he had instruded this terrorist group to prepare for and carry
out, when the order was given, an attempt on the life of the
secretary of the \Vest-Siberian Territory Committee of the
Party, Eiche. Apart from the terrorist group which I have
mentioned-Khodoroze's group-Muralov informed me in 1933
that a terrorist group had been fomned in the Kuzbas and given
the task of preparing for attempts on the lives of Party 1-eaders
while the latter visited the Kuzbas. Muralov also told me that.. theleader of the first group, Khodoroze, had sent one of the members
of this group, Nikolni Ivanov, to Moscow to carry out the assassination of Stalin. In 1933 I formed nuclei on the Omsk railway.
Vyshinsky: For \Vhat aims, s'pec.ifkailly?
Boguslavsku: In order to carry out all fthe measures we had
planned on the railways. At the end o.f 1933 I had a conversation
196

with the leader of this organization on the Omsk railway, Finashin, who told me that activities ihad been started •in several
locomotive depots on the Omsk line, main attention being paid to
the locomotive service. As regards the Tomsk railway, a group was
organized there in 1933, the leader being Obertaler, with Zhitkov,
the head af the locomotive service of the Tomsk railway, and
Eidman, the chief engineer. Olbertaler reported that wrecking had
also been started on the Tomsik rai~way.
T/gshinsky: Who is Obertaler?
Boguslavsky: He was the head of construction work on the
line. ObertaiJ.er told me o.f depots where nuclei of Trotskyites had
been formed and where \Vreckring actiVities were being carnied on,
the main objective here too befog the locomotive service.
In 1934 the work of the Siiberian centre, and my work in particular, entered upon a new path. In 1934 I had my second
meeting with Pyata:kov, th~s time visiting him ilil his apartment.
Pyatakov said t!hat our work was completely unsatisfactory, and
set us tasks which, though not new, had a new sound. In 1931,
for the first time, the word "wrecking," uttered in full voice, appeared in our vocabulary.
Then during the same conversation, when I complained that we
had very few people, Pyatakov informed me, firstly, that in addition to Shestov, Norkin-chief of construction of the Kemerovo
Combined \Vorks, a member of our organization, and one of the
accused in this trial-had already been carrying on wrecking work
in the Kuzbas for two years. In addition to Shestov, Norkin had
his o·wn group of specia•lists aind non-specialists who were carrying
on this work. But in view of the role and significance of the Kuzbas,
and the necessity of reinforcing the work there, Pyatakov informed me -that in the near future he would send to the Kuzbas
Drobnis, also one of thei accused in this trial, who was to carry on
acfrdties in the Kuz'bas on a larger scale and to establish contact
with Norkin on the one hand and with Shestov on 1.he other.
It was during this conversation too that it became clear to me
that 'necking activities were being carried on in the Kuzbas by
Stroilov, chief engineer of the Kuzbas Coal Trust, also accused
in fhis trial.
In response to m·y pessimi~m, occasioned by the arrest of I. N.
Smirnov and a number of other people in 1933 (this conversation
took place earily in 1934), Pyatakov said: "\Ve have to get down
to w-ork, especially as Trotsky has been sending letters and directives. He accuses us of inaction bordering, as he then said, on the
sabotage of his, Trotsky'.s, directives."
Vyshinsky: Did you do anything in pursuance of these directives in 1934?

197

Boguslausky: At the occasional meetings which I had with
Muralov and Sumetsky, the members of the centre, I learned that
Drobnis had established oontact with Norkin, that a fairly large
group ·of engineers and technicians had been enlisted, and that
this work was being pU'>hed forward there.
As regards work on the railways, which I was directing myself,
lhe number of accidents on the line considerably increased in
l 934, these being organized by Zh~tkov. In 1934 there wa·s a considerable increase in the number and percentage of locomotives
put out of action. And finallly, especially important wrecking activity was carried out in 1934 on the construction of new railway
lines, iin particula.r the Eiche-SokoJ. line.
In 1934 I •learned that in addition to the terrorist groups I have
mentioned-the groups of Khodloroze and Shestov-Muralov had
commissioned Kudryashev, manager of one of the state farms,
to perpetrate a terrorist aet agafost the Chairman of the Council
of People's Commiss•ars, Molotov, who was expected to come to
Siberia and to visit this farm in particular. Muralov told me
about this.
·
Vyshinsky: \Vho made preparations for this terrorist act?
Boguslausky: Kudryashev, on MuraJ.ov's orders.
Vyshin.sky {to Muralov): Accusw Muralov, was there such a
case?
Muralov: \Vhat part of Boguslavsky's statement are you refer··
ring to?
Vyshinsky: I am interested in this last statement of Boguslavsky's to the effect that you, Muralov, made preparations fot,a terrorist act against Comrade l\folotov.
-""'},furalov: This task was assigned not to Kudryashev hut toShestov and Khodoroze.
Vyshinsl.:y (to Shestov): Do you confirm Muralov's statement
that he commissioned you to organize an attempt on the life of
Comrade Molotov?
Shestou: Yes, I confirm it.
Vyshinsky (to l3ogus.lavs.ky): Accused Bog.uslavsky, explain.
Boguslavsky: The preparations for lerrorist acts were conducted in such a way that they were not concentrated in one place.
Shestov. was commissioned to organiz•e a terrorist act against
'Molotov if he came to the Kuzbas, as was in fact done hJ[ ..t11e_a.c:
cused Arnold. But parallel with this. Kudryashev was given the
same commission. I maintain th~s; Ku.dryashev told me about it
himself. The organization of terrorist groups by Shestov in such
a way that they might be able to carry out a terrorist act in any
place in the Knzbas does not preclude preparations for such an
act on this state farm.
198

Vyslzinsl.:y: \\'ho gave Kudryashev this commission?
BoguslausI.-y: Muralov.
Vyshinsku: Accused ~1uralov, do you know Kudryashev?
MLiralov: I know him as the nunager of a state farm which
I organized. But I categorically det:lare that Kudryashev was not
given any commi1Ssions.
Vyshinsky: Kudryashev was a member of youT Trotskyite organization?
M11ralov: No.
Vyslzinsky: But Bogu.slavsky says he was?
Boguslausky: Yes.
JluNlov: I did not know that K1Udrya1Shev was a member of
1he organization.
Vyshinsky: And Boguslavsky had direct comiectio"ns with Kudryashev?
Boguslausky: No.
Vyshinsky (to Boguslavsky): You say you know about this
from Kudryas.hev himse.U?
Boguslnvsl~y: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I emphasize once again: you are now relating the
episode concerning Kudryashev only frorn the words of Kudryashev himself?
Boguslaushg: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you have no other proofs as yet?
Boguslausky: No.
Vyshinsku: From whom did you hear about the preparations
for an attempt on the life of Molotov by Shestov?
Boguslavsky: From Muralov.
Vyshinsky: And did you hear about this from Shestov?
Boguslrwsku: No, I had no connections \vith him.
Vyshinsky: This does not come within the sphere of your
department?
Boguslavsky: \Ve had no divisions into departments.
Vyshinsky: How is that? You had charge of \vrecking affair'>
ftnd \1uralov had charge of terrorist affairs. \\'hat came within
your charge-terrorism or wrecking?
Boguslavsl.:y: \\'rc~cking.
Vyshinsky: \\'hile \Iurnlov had ch::uge of terrorism?
Bl)y11slrwsky: Yes.
·
l'yshinsk!f: And did \furalov haYc charge of \Yrc:cking as well?
Bpg11slavsky: Partly.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat were \fnrnlov's main functions?
Bog11slrwsky: Ile was the leader of !he ,,·hole centre and in addition; he dirccle<l that part of the work.
ryshinsJ;y: TJnorism?
199

Boguslavsky: Yes.
Vyshinsky (to MuraJ.ov): Do you also confirm this?
M uralou: I con:firm it.
Vyshinsky: That is just what I am talking about. (To Boguslavsky.) Pro<:ced.
Boguslavsl.:11: In connection with the dispute that has arisen,
I want to mention yet another terrorist act that was being prepared
against Molotov, namely, by Zhitkov, whom I have. mentioned
before in connection with wrecking work . . . .
Vyshinsky: How do you know about Zhitkov's preparations
for such an act?
Roguslavsky: He told me about it him.self.
Vyshinsky: \Vhere did he tell you, when?
Roguslavsky: In Novosibirsk.
Vyshinsky: When?
Boguslavsky: That was in 1934, when Molotov. . . . Excuse
me, I have made an incorrect statement. I was mistaken; no
other attempt on Malotov's life was prepared for.
Vyshinsky: But on whose life did Zhit:kov prepare to make an
attempt?
Boguslavsky: That was to have heen an .attempt on the lif.e of
Kaganovkh for which Zhitkov made preparations, but this was
later-in 1935.
Vyshinsky: And dii:d anyone else besides Zhitkov prepare for
an attempt on the life of Comrade Kaganovich?
· Bogw;lausk:g: Yes, Shesfov did. He trained groupt5 which were
to take action if any of the members of the .government,oiincluding
Kaganovich, came to Siberia.
~ > __
Vyshinsky: And are you aware that Bermant was preparing for
an attempt?
Boguslavsky: Yes. But Bennant was here, in Moscow.
Vyshinsky: All n1e same, you knew of some other terroris~
acts that \Vere being prepared against the members of the government and against members of the leading organs of our Party?
Boguslavskw Yes. Shestov made preparations for an attempt
on the life of :Molotov.
Vyshinsky: So Shestov planned an .attempt against l\fofotov?
BogHslavsky: Zhitkov against Kaga·novkh and Khodorozc
against Eiche.
-·· - -- · - - -·
Vyshirn:ku: And Ber-mant?
Boguslavsky: Bermant told me.
Vyshinsky: Answer the question, did Bermant make preparations for a terrorist act or not?
Boguslavsky: He did.
Vyshinsky: \Vhom did you learn that from?
200

Bogus1avsky: From Bermant himself.
Vyshinsky: Did you have any connection with these preparations?
Boguslavsky: No.
Vyshinsky: \Vho was in charge of the preparations?
Boguslavsky: I do not know. The fact is that Bermant was not
in \Vestern Siberia l:mt in Moscow.
Vyshinsky: Why did he tell you about it?
Boguslavsky: Because he had connections with me and had
known me since 1928.
Vyshinsky: But apparently he was connected not only with
you, and he was not bound to tell every Trotskyite about it.
Boguslavsky: He knew that I was a member of the centre,
and he knew about Trotsky's directives.
Vyshinsky: Have you known him, and has he ,known you for
long?
Boguslav.>ky: Since 1928.
,
Vyshimky: That is, you were connected with him for a number
of years.
Boguslavsky: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Go on.
_
Boguslav.>ky: The work along both lines continued in 1935.
And, as I have already sa.i<l, I had no more meetings with the
leaders of the Moscow centre. I forgot to mention that in the conversation with Pyatakov at his home in 1934, he told me of the
existence of this parallel or reserve centre consisting of the persons
'vho are figuring as the centre at this trial. He said that this was
necessitated by the arrest of Srnirnov and other members of the
main centre. So he to'ld me then about the formation of this centre,
but I did not meet anybody after 1934, and this meeting with
Pyatakov in 1934 was the last.
Vyshinsky: Did you continue your work as a member of the
Siberian centre?
Boguslavsky: Yes, I did.
l'yshinsky: What did it consist of?
Boguslavsky: The same as in Hl35: exc1usive1y m directing
wrecking activities on the railways. . ..
\'yshinslqj: So you specia~ized along thi5 line?
Bogu.>lavsky: Yes.
Vyshinskg: Until?
, Bomislovsky: Until my arrest.
Vyshinsky: Up to the very time of your arrest?
Boguslavsky: Yes.
.
VushimlJh;: Is that all?
Boguslavskg: Yes.
201

Vyshinsky: You knew Bermant as a member of the Trotskyite
underground organization since 1928. Did you know that Bermant
had firearms?
Bog11slcwsky: 'f cs.
Vyshinsky: What did he have?
Boguslavsky: Three revolvers.
Vyshin.~ky: Did he have cartridges?
Boguslavsky: He also had cartridges.
Vyshinsky: How many?
Boguslavsky:. Perhaps fifty, perhaps eighty· or a hundred.
Vyshinsky: That is, a fairly large quantity for a private person?
Boguslavsky: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is, he had something in the nature of a small
arsenal? And how did you know about this?
Boguslavsky: He told me about it.
Vyshinsky: And was there no talk about him sending these
firearms to you in Siberia?
Boguslavsky: There was a special instruction that he should
send these firearms to Western Siberia. And he left with the fi:r•earms, but he was arrested and the firearms taken away in August
1936. I had made that suggestion to him in JUily 1936.
Vyshinsky: He was prevented from bringing the firearms by
the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs?
i · Boguslavsky: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Why did yDu conceal this at the preliminary investigation and say nothing about it?
Boguslavsky: I did not conceal it. It is in my testimon'j.
Vyshinsky: Allow me to verify it. You were arrested ... ?"> ·
Boguslavsky: On August 5, 1936.
Vyshinsky: Did you begin to give frank testimony at once?
Boguslovsky: No, not at once, but very soon.
Vyshinsky: You held out for some time, less than Radek?
Bogushwsky: I first began lo teslify on August 14.
Vyshinsky: You testified on September 6, 1936, and in this
testimony I find-I request the Court to allow me to read it-Vol.
XXXIV, page 30; you ·de::ilt there with this Bennant. You were
asked the following question: "\Vith what purpose did you indu-ce
the member of your organization, BPrmant, to dispatch to you
from Moscow the firearms he had in his possession?" Your
reply: "It i~ true that Bermant was a member of our Trotskyite
organization. l!ntil very recently he had organizational connections
·with me personally; but I never instructed Bermant to bring from
Moscow the firearms he had in his possession." Question: "You
are not telling the truth. On August 10 of this year (i.e., 1936),
when Bcrmant was searched, three revolvers and 80 live cartridges
202

were discovered. Bermant testified that he had brought these firearms from Moscow on your instructions." Reply: "I confess that
I found it very hard to give Bermant away at once, because he was
my best friend." Is that what happened?
Boguslavsky: Yes. But this means that I did testify.
Vyshim;ky: It means that you denied it.
Boguslavsky: I denied it.
,
Vyshinsky: It means that then, having been exposed, you confessed.
Boguslavsky: I confessed.
Vyshinsky: I ask you, why did you at first deny it?
Boguslavsky: I did not deny it.
Vyshinsky: You have just said that you denied it at first and
gave as your reason that you did not want to givie away your best
friend. Is that true?
Boguslavsky: It is.
Vyshinsky: Tel'l me, recently, in the last few months before
your arrest, were you as sure of the.justice of your cause as you
had been formerly, or were you already wavering, were you seized
by certain doubts, by uneasiness?
Boguslavsky: I would say that there were waverings and un_easiness.
Vyshinsky: Nevertheless, you continued your activities?
Boguslavsky: I did.
Vyshinsky: At first you would not testify at all, and then you
began to testify. Perhaps this is to ibe explained by some specific
conditions of your arrest, perhaps pressure was brought to bear
on you?
Boguslavsky: :\"o .
. Vyslzinsky: Perhaps it was suggested that you should testify
in !he way you subsequently did, in return for which your sentence
would be mitigated?
Boguslavsky: No.
Vyshimky: Consequently you began to give this testimony quite
..-nluntarily and sincerely, becaus·e of your internal personal convictions?
Boguslavsl.:y: Quite true; if the Court permits me I would like
to explain my motives.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat motives induced you, Boguslavsky, an old
Trotskyite, who for some ten years had devoted yourself to the
fight in the ranks of the Trotskyites nigainst the Party and against
the Soviet govermnent, and who continued your anti-Soviet Trotskyite activities until the very day of your arrest, what motives have
induced you to say what you arc saying, to expose people, to lay
down your arms, etc. \Vhat has led you to this?
203

Boguslavsky: \Vhat has led me to this? In reply to the question
of the Citizen Procurator, I must say that ihe interval of nine days
between the time· of my arrest--even eight days, because it was on
the 6th rather than the 5th-and the 14th, was a time during
which, if Lmay .so express it, owing to my arrest, I recovered my
balance and I was able to bring my still largely, iif not utterly,
criminal ideas, in order. This explains my stubibomness o.f these
eight days. I must frankly say here in Court that in the last few
years, I mean in 1934, 1935 and 1936, the position of a criminal,
in which I found myself, not onily disturbed me, but weighed on
me heavily. ·
· Despite the fact that I have waged a struggle for many years,
I request the Court to believe me when I say that not everything
had been obliterated of that which the class I came from had
given me and which had transformed me from a homeless waif
into a man of politics and leader in those positions to which the
Party had assigned me.
In this connection I want to mention the absolutely intolerable
and incredible rottenness within the Trotskyite organization, which
I could not help feeling at every step. I must confess that many
things have become clear to me only at this trial, in the course
of these two days, thirigs that were absolutely unknown to me
before. I cannot refrain from confessing here in . Court to the
feelings of revulsion and disgust I experienced when Radek related
here how, when the bloc with the Zinovievites had hard~y iheen
formed, the fear began to be expressed that certain people in this
bloc might cheat others.
~
The second thing is that we who conducted the work "'O:ll- the
spot were absolutely unaware that our country was being sold to
foreign capital behind our backs. I learned something about this
when I was handed the indictment. But everything became clear
to me only here, when I heard the testimony of Pyatakov a!fd
Radek.
Vyshinsky: Did Pyatakov and Radek conceal it from you?
Boguslavsky: They have testified here that they particularly
concealed Trotsky's last directive of the end of 1935 and told
nobody about it, including me.
O( course, even so I ;hould have realized at least what every
worker and collective farmer in our country reaiizes=-where this
was leading. 'Ve who held 1he view that it is impossible to build
up socialism in one country and adopted the path of terrorism
and wrecking, we should have realized that if it wasn't socialism
we \Vere intending to build, what was it? \Vhy, there is only socialism and capitalism.
Vyshinsky: But you realized this before?
204

Boguslavsky: Yes, true, that is what I say. When I was arrested
I felt like a man who is on the verge of an aibyss and knows that
he must fall into it. For eight days, until the time I first- began
to give testimony, it was already quite clear to ·me that the time
had come to put a stop to it. Of course, l realized. it too la,te.
And, indeed, everything we did was repulsive, beginning with these
abominable diversive activities. "Fish be.gin to stink from the head
down," the proverb says. And we ought to have cut off this_ head,
but we did not. And we engaged in wrecking activities and diversive acts in· order to ensure the defeat of our Union. I-have committed a crime. 1 was guided only by what I have already spoken
about. Notwithstanding the fact that my fate is now in th~. hands
of the Court of the Soviet state, I beg the Court to believe that I
was guided by this, and only filris.
The President (to the Prosecutor): Have you any questions?
Vyshinsky: No.
·
The President: Have the accused any questions to Boguslavsky?
The Accused: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: We shall now proceed to the examination of the
accused Drobnis.
Accused Drobnis, do you confirm the testimony you gave durin~ the preliminary investigation and before the Military Collegium
of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. in Novosibirsk?
-Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Do you confirm the testimony given by Boguslavsky that you were a member of the West-Siberian Trotskyite
centre?
·
Drobnis: Since the end of July 1934, I was put in charge of
all the wrecking and diversive activities fo the whole of the
Kuzbas.
·
- Vyshinsky: In the whole of the Kuz·bas?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And before that did you take any part in underground Trotskyite criminal activities after 1927?
Drobnis: After I was reinstated in the Party in 1929, my Trotskyite activities were resumed at the beginning of 1932. I harboured a number of doubts, which provided the source of my subsequent criminal activities. Knowii1g my frame of mind, I. N. Smirnov spoke to me of the neceSsity of resuming Trotskyite counterrevolutionary activity, of Trotsky's new directiV'es, of the adoption
of .terrorist tactics. I accepted the line set forth by Smirnov.
Smirnov told me that I ought to get in contact with Pyatakov,
who would give me somewhat more detailed information. Ovdng
to the fact that I was absent for a long time on official business in
1932, I did not get into contact with Pyatakov until February 1933.
205

In Central Asia, where I 'vent to work, I got into contact on
Pyatakov's instructions with Smilga and Safonova. Smilga, when
giving me information, told me that the task was to orga·nize and
expand terrorist groups who could be dispatched to Moscow should
the centre demand it.
It should be said that my wo:rk in Central Asia kept me chiefly
tra~elling all over Central Asia, and that I took no actual part
in the Trotskyite work there. But here I want to say, not in order
to minimize the vile work I performed, and not in order to mitigate
my guilt, that my travels in Central Asia were due not so much to
the character of my work as to the dou1bts I felt about terrorism.
I could not .assimilate this somehow.
I lived in Central Asia throughout 1933 and left in May 1934
because the Trotskyite centre decided rto transfer me to Western
Siberia. Since Pyatakov was in a position to transfer me from
one job in industry to another, this problem could be solved very
easiiy.
-·
·
·
·
Vyshinsky: That is, Pyatakov took advantage of his official
position and transferred you wherever he thought necessary?
Drobnis: Well, of course, that 1goes without saying. In 1934,
before leaving for Western Siberia, I had a conversation with
Pyatakov in his private office. Pyatakov stressed and confirmed
the nC{:essity of my going to Western Siberia in order to strengthen
the Trotskyite counter-revolutionary activities there, and at the
same time he outlined an entirely new task: not on:ly terrorism, but
also diversive acts· and wrecking activities. 'Vhat reasoQ_s <lid Pyatakov give for this task? He said that terrorism was a drastic
method, but that it was far from enough. It had to be supplemented
by wrecking and underground activities in order to undermine the
achievements gained by the Soviet power, to undermine the prestige of Stalin's leadership and to disorganize economic life; because
successes raised the prestige of the leaders, strengthened their influence among the working masses, and if we did not now transf_er
our energies to disorganizing the economic life of the country, it
was obvious that we could not arrive at power by terrorism alone.
That vrns why activities in the Kuznetsk Basin had lo be developed
in the most energetic fashion. And he added that here we must act
with the utmost determination. He repeated the alreac;ly .kl!o_,~!}
expression: '·the worse, the better." He repeated that we must act
energetically and persist~ntiy, an(j_ stop at nothing.
All means were useful and fair; such was Trotsky's directive,
which the Trotskyite centre subscribed to_
Pyatakov also said that we must enlist for this work specialists
from among the former wreckers and those who were counter206

revolutionary minded, and that in \Vestern Siberia I should establish connections with Shestov, Leonov and Vladimir Kosior.
Pyatakov justified diversive and wrecking activities solely by
considerations of internal policy. He never, either then or later, at
our second meeting, said a word to me about the new line, about
the agreements with the various foreign states which Trotsky was
negotiating and for which he had I"eceived the approbation of the
centre. He did not say a word to me about the existing agreements
and understandings for the partitioning of the country, and so on
mid so forth. I learnt this only from the indictment, I learnt this
only from the evidence which Pyatakov, Sokolnikov, Radek and
Sereb:ryakov gave here. At that time· he gave reasons which exclusively concerned internal affairs. I left for Western Siberia. I
was told that since I was a member of the \.Vest-Siberian centre.
I must get into contact with the West-Siberian centre. On my
way to Kemerovo, whither I ha<l been appointed as assistant chief
of the Kemerovo Works Construction, I ha,d a talk with Muralav,
the leader of the West-Siberian cen.lre. Muralov told me that he
himself was in <lirect charge of the terrorist work, that the groups
of Khodoroze, Shestov and others ha<d been formed, that there
were terrorist .groups in Tomsk, chiefly in the higher educational
institutions. Muralov also told me that he was in direct charge
of_ wrecking activities in agriculture in ·western Siberia and that
.one of his iu::imeqiate helpers was Meyerchenko, that the wrecking
activities on the railways were being conducted by Boguslavsky,
and that I would have to devote my attention to the work in the
Kuznetsk Basin.
I asked Muralov what was Rakovsky's attitude towards this
centre. ~Iuralov replied that up lo the moment of his recantation
.Rakovsky had not been a member of the \Vest-Siberian centre, but
that he had been directly connected with it and that he was thoroughly informed of the new tactics, of Trotsky's new directives
regarding terrorism and di°versive acts.
Vyshinsky: \.\11en did you arrive in Kemerovo?
Drobnis: I arrived in Kemerovo on August 3rd or 4th, 1934.
Vyshinsky: Did you get in touch with the local Trotskyites in
:Kemerovo?
Drobnis: In Kemerovo I endeavoured to earn the confidence
of the Party and Soviet organizations, so as to weaken the suspicious and cautious attitude towards me. Thus it should be said
that it 'vas along these lines, and chiefly along these lines that my
considerable efforts were directed. I £-ndeavoured to be active, to
fulfil all tasks assigned to me. I took upon myself commissions,
and it should be said I gained the confidence of the Party organizations, and this greatly faci>litated my subsequent work.
207

Further, I must say that in the distribution of duties between the
chi·ef of construction and his two assistants, I was assigned exclusively administrative work. This hampered my activities,
since I was limited to the sphere of my work and it was
difficult for me to gain direct access to construction, installation
_and operation of the enterprises already functioning. This was
in charge of Norkin, accused here in this trial, and of Kartsev,
the assistant chief engineer, who has also been arrested. And
so, this was concentrated in their hands, which made it difficult for me to carry on any work. I ·therefore directed my
efforts to creating necessary conditions for myself, so that later,
having acquainted myself with the surroundings and people, to
begin the recruiting work. In March 1935 Pyatakov summoned me
to Moscow to hear my report on my wrecking and <liversive activities in the Kuznetsk Basin and especially at the Kemerovo
Chemical Works. Pyatakov informed me that at the Kemerovo
Chemical Works, Norkin, chief of construction of the works, had
on his instructions already started rather serious wrecking activities, and that this work was being carried on by the chief
engineer, Kartsev. DuriI11g this same co:rirversation Pyatakov said
that Trotsky was demanding more forward and energetic work,
an·d he emphasized that we were not to be particular about
means.
I returned to Kemerovo, got in touch with Noi:kin and we began to develop our activities. Norkin told me that he had a plan
of w.recking activity, although an unwritten one. I made no objection to this plan, all the more so that certain parts ill' it had
already to a large extent been realized.
.
y.> ·
Vyshinsky: That is, it was the plan which was drawn up by
Norkin and agreed upon with Pyatakov in Moscow?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How was it agreed upon? Also verbally?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: By making a report?
Drobnis: By making a report. Norkin made frequent visits to
:Moscow, so he could inform him more often.
Vyshinsky: And from whom do you know this? From Norkin
or from someone else?
Drobnis: From Norkin.
Vyshinsky: But what <lid Norkin tell you, concretely? On what
grounds do you affirm that this plan was agreed upon?
Drobnis: I know this both from what Norkin told me and from
conversations with Pyatakov.
/'
Vyshinsky: What did Norkin say?
208

Drobnis: He said that there was·such a plan, explained it and
said that this plan had been approved by Pyatakov and that we
must commence this work along these lines. Do you agree to this?
he asked me. I said that I accepted this plan.
Vyshinsky; A question to the accused Norkin.
Accused Norkin, did you hear this part of the testimony?
Norkin: I did.
·
Vyshinsky: Have you any corrections to make?
Norkin: Only minor ones.
Vyshinsky: I am interest~d in one question: was such a plan
of wrecking really drawn up by yol.l. and was this plan agreed
upon or was it approved by Pyatakov?
Norkin: There was no such plan drawn up in a regular way.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, it was not in written form?
Norkin: And not drawn up in detail.
Vyshinsky: Drohnis says that in a talk with him you indicated
the main questions contained in it. . . . ·
NorJ..."in: That is quite true. In a conversation with Drobnis and
Kartsev-arrd we had frequent talks-we told each other about the
work, and everything was previouly agreed upon with Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky (to DrQlbnis): And what did the plan consist of?
Drobnis: One of the wrecking tasks in the plan was to diffuse
funds on measures of secondary importance. Another was to
<lelay constrncticm work in such a way as to prevent the launch.ing of important departments on the dates fixed by the government.
Vyshinsl;y: That is, to upset the schedule as well?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Chiefly in enterprises of importance for the <lefence
of the country?
Drobnis: Yes. Then there were frequent revisions of the building designs, and delays in. payments to the designing organizations, so that the designs were received very late.
Needless to say, this retal'ded the speed and progress of construction work. It must be said that this was done rather cleverly.
For example, there were plans for the main, basic buildings of
the Combined Fertilizer Works, but for things like the gas mains,
the steam supply pipes and. so forth, \vhich might appear of
secondary importance lbut were really of very great importance
for starting the plant on schedule, plans were not prepared in
time, and of course this -constant fussing in <lealings with the
-0rganizations responsi'ble for the designs led to the plans arriving
much too late .
.Of the enterprises already in operation, a number of things
were deliberately left uncompleted in the departments of the coke
209

and chemical plant, and this seriously affected the work of the
plant, lowering the quality of fhe product and resulting in the
production of coke with an excessive moisture and ash content.
As the Kemerovo Combined Coke and Chemical \Vorks supplied
the industry of the Urals with coke, this in its turn affected the
quality of the metal. At one time, in 1935, this even led the metal
workers of the Urals to send a delegation to Kemerovo in order to
point out to what an extent the low quality of coke produced by
the Kemerovo Combined Coke and Chemical Works affected the
quality of the metal, prevented them from developing the Stakhanov movement there, delayed the tempo of production and the
work of the metallurgical plants. Although the workers in the
Coke and Chemical Works strove to improve the work, they could
not succeed because of the wrecking activities that were going on
there.
. The district power station was put into such a state that, if it
were <leemed necessary for wrecking purposes, and when the order
was given, the mine could be flooded. In acldition, coal was supplied
that was technically unsuitable for foel fC?r the power station, and
this led to explosions. This was done quite deliberately.
Such, approximately and in general outline, were the measures
of a wrecking character ·that were planned and put into effect
In addition, breakdowns were arranged. There were two breakdowns of a very serious nature. There was no loss of life, it is true,
but a number of workers were seriously injured.
As regards the auxiliary enterprises, that is those with which
I was directly concerneq, wrecking work was conducted in=':the automobile transport department. This chiefly consisted in increasing
the idle periods in the work of the trucks and reducing the number
of trucks in operation. Furthermore, housing construction was
conducted at such a slow rate that engineers, technicians and
workers were left without dwellings, which would give rise to a
difficult and grave situation when operation started. This, so to
speak, is roughly what concerns the plan of wrecking measures
and its realization.
Vyshinsky: Go on.
.
Drobnis: According to thP. instructions of the centr·e I was also
to establish connections with Shestov. Shestov came to see me in
Kemerovo in the autumn of 1935. At this meeting Sheslov--fold irie
what measures he intended to carry out, chiefly to disrupt the construction of new mines and to lower the output of coal and a number of other measures. He advised me to utilize for wrecking activities at the Kemerovo mine a former wrecker named Peshekhonov.
Shestov, apparently, was uhable to cope with the Kemerovo
mine. I was therefore obliged fo take it under my direct charge_
210

I managed to establish connections with the assistant chief, later
chief, of the "Tsentralnaya" pit, Noskov, and with Shubin and
Kurov, and to carry on wrecking work with their aid.
Vyshinsky: Noskov, Shubin and Kurov-they all figured in
the- Kemerovo trial?
Drobnis: Yes, On this same occasion Shestov informed me that
through the medium of Stroilov or directly, or through somebody
else--I do not recall at the moment, Shestov will probably correct
me if I am inexact-but he told me that they had contact with
some foreign specialists who had been enlistei:J ....
Vyshinsky: Did Shestov tell you this?
Drobnis: Yes, Shestov, who is charged with diversive and
wrecking activities.
Vyshinskg: Did Shestov mention any names to you?
Drobnis: No, he did not mention names to me, but he mentioned Peshekhonov who is working at the Kemerovo Mines.
Vyshinsky: And in regard to connections with foreign specialists, he did not mention any names?
Drobnis: No, he <lid not mention any names.
Vyshinsky: And you did not hear of these names afterwards?
Drobnis: Yes, I did hear of one name afterw"ards, but that was
not from Shestov. It must be said that after I went to see Pyatakov,
who demanded that the work be carried on more intensively
and energetically, and poin~ed out that not enough.was being done,
I spoke about this to Shestov, telling him that things were in a
bad way at Kemerovo, that no work at all was being done there.
Even before I told Noskov about this, Noskov informed me thaf:
they had connections with Peshekhonov. Stroilov gave instructions
to Peshekhonov to get in touch with the Trotskyite organizations
existing at the mines. Noskov asked me how I viewed this matter.
I said that this was altogether admissible and indispensable, forthe line both of Trotsky and of the centre was that we must mobilize all forces to deliver the most telling and most powerful
blow. In the course of one conversation, Noskov informed me that
Peshekhonov had told him that he had enlisted in the organization for wrecking work the German engineer Stickling.
·
Vyshinsky: Was this the Stickling who figured in the Kemer<n-o case?
.
Drobnis: Yes. I said to Noskov: that's good. In this w::i.y
activity was started in the Kemerovo mine as well. A number of
measures had -been planned there by Noskov, - most of them
measures to sabotage the Stakhanov movement. It must be said
that the sabotage of the Stakhanov movement also occupied a
prominent pfo.ce in our plan of work at the Kemerovo Combined \Yorks Construction. At one time, at the very beginning,
211

the Stakhanov movement at the mines had developed quite well,
but later the pace of the development of this movement slackened
somewhat, and when the Party organizations issued the call to
advance the Stakhanov movement, our counter-revolutionary organization concentrated all its efforts on hindering this. The second task was to reduce the output of coal and, in addition, to
damage the ventilation system, fill the pits with gas .ain<l cause
explosions. In July-1935 Noskov reported to me that he had completed prieparations for the explosion of the "Tsentralnaya" Mine,
which was in his charge. I approved of this.
Vyshinsky: When did he say that he had completed preparations for the explosion at the. "Tsentralnaya" Mine?
Drobnis: This conversation took plaoe in the beginning or the
middle of July, 1936.
Vyshinsky: And did you discuss with him under what conditions this explosion was to take place?
Drobnis: Noskov said that such a wrecking measure as allowing gas to accumulate in the mine would result in explosion and
would cause loss of life. I replied: well then, we must be ready
for this, too. It would even ·be a good thing, because it would arouse
the resentment of the workers which will enable us to win their
sympathies.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, you not only approved of Noskov's
plan for an explosion in the mine, hut ev.e:p. gave your sanction to
the explosion taking place under conditions which would directly
involve the death of workers?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: With all the consequences?
..... Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky:.You said that workers were bound to be killed?
Drobnis: I asked Noskov whether such a wrecking act could be
performed without loss of life. He told me that it was out of the
question. Thereupon I said that there was no use being finicky anti
that we must he readv for this.
Vyshimky: How ·aid you explain that?
Drobnis: I said that . . . that we must . . . .I already explained that we must be prepared for this too, that it would even
. . . and even if it did cause loss of life it would also arouse the
resentment of the workers, and that would be in our -favour.- - __
Vyshinsky: But this is not 'vhat you tried to assert here. You
just said that you asked Noskov whether the sacrifice· of life
could not be avoided. But it follows from what you said that, far
fr9m being opposed to sacrifice of life, you thought, to the conlrary, that the more lives lost, the better for you.
Drobnis: Well, yes, that's so, more or less.

---

212

Vyshinsky: 'Vell, I realize that it is of course somewhat inconvenient for you to speak of such things here in public. But
there is nothing to be done about it. Did you say that there was
nothing to shrink from?
Drobnis: I did.
Vyshinsky: And that meant that if workers were to perish as
a result, well, let them perish. Did you encourage Noskov?
Drobnis: Yes.
"
Vyshinsky: You encouraged him with regard to the killing
of workers, and even said that the more there were killed the
better. Did I understand you .to say that?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is, I am exaggerating nothing?
Drobnis: You are exaggerating a little.
Vyshinsky: Let us make this dear, let us recall the facts. Did
you say to Noskov that the more victims, the better?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat, then, am I exaggerating?
Drobnis: I did not mean by this.that he should kill.more.
Vyshinsky: Did you think that if you said "more," he would
understand you to mean "less," that he would understand you to
mean that you wanted to reduce the loss of life?
Drobnis: I wanted to reduce. . . .
Vyshinsky: Yet you said, let there be more, and even explained
why more !deaths were necesSa.ry. You said, let there ·be more
victims, since that would arouse the resentment of the workers.
The greater the number of victims, the less the resentment?
Drobnis: No, on the contrary.
Vyshinsky: The greater the number of victiil].S, the greater
the resentment?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Is that \Vhat you wanted?
Drobnis: Yes. in effect, that is what I wanted.
Vyshinsky: In effect-or djd you want it? Speak plainly.
Drobnis: I fully and completely confirm the testimony I gave
at the preliminary investigation.
Vyshinsky: Why confirm? You are now in court and you can
give testimony without confirming the old testimony.
Drobnis: I am not quibbling; I fully and completely confirm
my earlier testimony.
Vyshinsky: Did you speak to Noskov about preparations for
an explosion in the "Tsentralnaya" Mine?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did Noskov ask you, or did you ask him, what
about the people? Who asked the question?
213

Drobnis: Noskov.
Vyshinsky: He asked you what about the workers? Is that
true?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you first said that you asked whether
loss of life could not he avoided. What did you answer?
Drobnis: I said that we must be prepared for this.
Vyshinsky: "For this," for what?
Drobnis: For the sacrifice of workers.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat does "sacrifice" mean?
Drobnis:. It means murder.
Vyshinsky: And how did you justify it?
Drobnis: The more victims the better.
Vyshinsky: For whom?
Drobnis: For the wrecking work.
Vyshinsky: For the Trotskyites?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Why?
Drobnis: Be.cause this might arouse the resentment of the
workers against the Soviet government."
Vyshinsky: Arouse the resentment of the workers against
the Soviet government, ·was that your aim?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And it was for this that you were willing to resort to any means, even the murder of workers?
Drobnis: Yes ..
Vyshinsky: What then am I exaggerating?
">C.---- Drobnis: Nothing.
Vyshinsky: Then this explosion was effected?
Drobnis: I was arrested on August 6 and the explosion took
place on September 23.
Vyshinsky: But you sanctioned the explosion?
Drobnis: I sanctioned it at the end or in the middle of July.
Vgshinsky: Consequently, your arrest did not prevent the explosion from being effected, because No.skov remained at the mine?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsku: And could it have been prevented?
Drobnis: Prevented? Of course it could.
Vyshinsku: Who could have prevented it?
Drobnis: I could have prevented it.
Vyshinsky: You did not prevent it?
· Drobnis: I did not prevent it.
Vyshinsky: The explosion was effected?
Drobnis: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I have po more questions.
214

The President: Accused Drobnis, did you advise Noskov, in case
everything came out and he was questioned, on whom he was
to lay the blame for these diversive and wrecking acts?
Drobnis: Yes.
The President: \-Vhat instructions did you give Noskov if he
should be called to account?
Drobnis: To lay all the blame on the nen·Party specialists.
The President: Even on those who were in no way involved?
Drobnis: \\Tell, of course.
The President: The Court is adjourned until 6 o'clock.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

/'
215

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 25, 1937, 6.00 P.M.

Commandant: The Court is comin:g. Please rise.
The President: The session is resumed.
Comrade Procurator, have you any questions to put to Drobnis?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: Accused Muralov will now be examined.
Accused Muralov, do you confirm the testimony you gave in
December and January?
Afuralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Tell us about the part you played in the West-Siberian underground Trotskyite centre.
Muralov: I will begin with 1928. I arrived in Novosibirsk in
November 1928. Here I want to make a slight correction regarding the date mentioned by accused Boguslavsiky. He said that he
found me in Novosibir.sk in January. I only arrived in Novosibirsk
at the end of November. All the rest that he said was quite correct. I confirm. it. .
..
.
As for what he said about the further adivities, when the
Siberian· centre was re-established, Boguslavsky is ~omewhat
wrong about the dates. He said that the directive was rec<Qv~
in Hl32. The centre was re-established at the end of 193C But
this too, perhaps, is not of great importance. When the first Novosibirsk centre fell to pieces and I was the only. . . .
Vyshinsky: \Vhen was that?
Muralov: In the beginning of 1931. \Vhile I was on an officiai
business trip in Moscow I met Ivan Nikitich Smirnov. He told methat he had been abroad and had seen Sedov. He told me about
Trotsky's new line about resorting to terrorism against the leadership of the Communist Party and the government.
Smirnov advised us to re-establish the Siberian centre to con'sist of persons known to me and him, those who retur-ned--to-th.e-.
Partv in 1929. These names were mentioned-Sumetskv and Bogusl~vsky. The first task of this centre was to gather Trotskyite
forces and to organize serious terrorist acts. On my arrival in
Novosibirsk I arrnnged to meet Sumctsky and Boguslavsky
and told them what Ivan Nikitich Smirnov had proposed, which
I accepted as proper. They also agreed with me and we three be21.6

gan to function as the Trotskyite counter-revolutionary. centre in
Siberia. I was the leader; Sumetsky was to gather the cadres,..
chiefly among the young people in the uniwrsities. I instructed
the Trotskyite Khodoroze to organize a terrorist group. He formed.
it in 1932 .. The designated_ object of the terrorist act was the
secretary of the Territory Committee of the C.P.S.U., Eiche. In the·
same year, 1932, Shestov arrived in Novosibirsk an.d brou.ght a.
letter from Sedov.
)
This letter contained a lot of fiction and was written in the·
ordinary way, but what was not fiction was written with.
antipirin and when made visible was found to ibe Trotsky's directive to proceed. to terrorist actiyities. The letter confirmed what.
Smirnov had said.
Vyshinsky: And had you known Sedov .before that? Had you,
known hini a long time?
Muralov: I knew Sedov-Trotsky's son, Lev Lvovich Sedov.
The first time I saw him was in Moscow about 1919 or 1920..
and since I knew that he was the executive and so to speak the
business manager of Trotsky, I often came in touch with him in.
the period of our Moscow organization. I knew him very well,.
often met him in Trotsky's apartment, and I knew everything·
about him, including his physical defect-a fact which Shestov·
confirmed. So I made sure that this letter was not a forgery; I
recognized the handwriting.
Yyshinsky: You know his handwriting?
Jfuralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: The handwriting was like his?
JI uralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So your doubts disappeared?
Jluralov: All my doubts disappeared then. In the next year,.
\vhen I met Ivan Nikitich Smirnov in ~Ioscow, Ivan Nikitich, afterasking me what we had done-I informed him and asked him.
what about the future and what the news was-told me that there
was now something ne\v, namely the program of economic terrorism. I did not understand this term, not knowing what economic
terrorism was. He explained to me that in effect, it.was wrecking.
\Vhose line is it? I asked. He said it was also Trotsky's.
After returning to Novosibirsk, I told my centre about this,
and we thereupon arranged that Boguslavsky should take this.
job. and Shestov do the same in the Kuznetsk Basin. In 1932 I reC€iYed another letter from Sedov brought by Seidman, a Trotsky·
ite engineer. This letter was also outwardly concerned with imagi·
nary everyday matters; enquiries after people's health an<:l §o forth.
The business part was written in code, and it was meant, properly
217

speaking, not for me but for I. N. Smirnov. I cannot give the contents of this letter word for word, but the sense of it was that I was
;to convey it to I. N. Smirnov. This letter instructed us to accelerate
terrorist acts against Stalin, Voroshilov, Kaganovich and Kirov.
In 1933, I again receivedl a letter from Sedov in which it wa~
:stated that "the old man is pleased with our activities."
After 1933 I received no more letters, and after the arrest of
I. N. Smirnov, having heard previously from I. N. Smirnov that a
,paraUel centre, a reserve centre 'had been organized, I endeavoured
to get in touch with Pyatakov on my arrival in Moscow in 1934.
In 1934 I communicated with Pyatakov and informed him of
-0ur adivities. And incidentally at fuat time, in fact before that
year, Drobnis arrived in Novosibirsk, having been appointed to the
Kemerovo Combined Chemical Works as assistant chief of con-struction; he came to see me and pointed out that he, too, had
been sent by Pyatakov from Moscow, and that he could and should
-carry out wrecking jobs. So this part of industry was likewise
-covered by us-by the Siberian centre in the person of Drobnis.
Pyatakov informed me that he had come to an agreement with
the Rights. At first it surprised· me to hear that the Rights had
•Come over to our position also in regard to terrorism and in regard
to wrecking, and that they had their own .centre consisting of
"Tomsky, Rykov and Bukharin. This news surprised• me, firstly,
·because I regarded them as opportunists, and secondly, as
-cowards, incapable of drastic action. Pyatakov told me that they
had changed, and here I learned of the composition of the reserve
centre, which consisted of Pyatakov, Radek, Sokolnikov, Sfil"ebrya'.kov.
I saw Pyatakov again in 1935. I think it was at the beginning
<>r in the middle of October 1935. He did not tell me anything
new, but mentioned that as regards terrorist acts I had better not
be too impetuous. \Ve had a talk on this subject and reproaches
-wer·e uttered. I blamed them because they had done nothing here
fo this respect since the assassination of Kirov.
Vyshinsky: In what sense had they done nothing?
Muralov: I mean they had carried out nothing, no new acts.
Vyshinsky: Not murdered anyone?
Muralov: No. Nor had we. I told about the unsuccessful attempt on the life of Molotov, the Chairman of the Council- of-People's Commissars, but he told me not to be so much of a soldier
and not to allow myself to be carried away so easily.
Vyshinsky: \\'ho told you not to be so much of a soldier and
not to allow yourself to be carried away so easily?
.
Muralov: Pyatakov. After this meeting ~vith Pyatakov, I did
not have any more meetings with him, I did not see him again.
v. - - _

218

This was at the beginning or in the middle. of October. I did not
receive any new instructions from him, nor did our whole Novosibirsk centre. True, he pointed out that we must bring pressure
to bear on Drobnis, since he was not very active, and when I met
Drobnis in Novosibirsk I told him that the centre was not very
·well satisfied, that he must brace up a little. So much for the
wrecking work.
Regarding the organization of terrorist groups and acts, as
I have already stated, the first group was organized by Khodoroze
under my personal direction and consisted of three or four persons in Novosibirsk. Then there was a group in Tomsk consisting
of Kashkin fdirector of the IndUJsti:fal Institute) and Nikolayev
(his assistant). I met them, gave them instructions, and approved
their plan for an attempt on the life of Eiche if he arrived
there. Groups were organized by Shestov in Prokoipyevsk and
_.\nzherka. In Prokopyevsk we attempted in 1934 to commit a terrorist act against Molotov, but the attempt failed ..So that, actually,
no terrorist acts were committed iJJ \\'estern Siberia.
Vyshinsky: You failed?
J\.Juralov: Yes, we failed.
Vyshinsky: But you prepared?
.1\furalov: Yes, we prepared.
Vyshinsky: You failed because you abandoned the attempt,
or for a reason over which you had no control?
Muralov: No, at that time we just failed.
Vyshinsky: But an attempt was made?
Jluralov: There was an attempt on the life of Molotov, but
the attempted automobile accident failed.
Vyshinsky: Tell us please in detail how the attempt on the life
of Comrade Molotov was organized: to whom did1 you g.ive such
a task, and who organized it?
Muralov: I charged Shestov with this. He told me that he had
a group that was already prepared, headed, I think, by Cherepukhin, and that he had prepared
chauffeur who was ready to
sacrifice his own life in order to kill Molotov. But at the last moment the chauffeur funked-he would not risk his own life and
so .:\Iolotov's life was saved.
Vyshinsky: How was the attempt made?
Murolov: The car was to turn into a ditch while at full speed.
Under such circumstances the car by its own momentum would
overturn and get smashed, while the people. . . .
Vyslzinsky: vVas the attempt made to overturn the car in the
-Oitch?

a

219

Muralov: The attempt wa;s made, but then the chauffeur
funked and the car did not fall into the ditch.
Vyshinsky: \Yho was this chauffeur?
Mizralov: Arnold, I think.
l-'yshinsky: Did you .instruct Shestov to organize this affair?"
Muralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Permit me to ask Shestov. Accused Shestov, do you
confirm this part of Muralov's testimony?
Shestov: Yes. The first conversation took place in November
1931. At that ·time Muralov set me the task of carrying out a
terrorist act only in regaiid to the secretary of the \Vest-Siberian
Territory Committee, Eiche. Later, when I reported to him that
the Prakopyevsk terrorist group was ready to commit terrorist
acts, Muralov gave me wider instructions for terrorist acts. He
told me that it was necessary to prepare the Prokopyevsk terrorist
group for terrorist acts not against Eiche alone, but i.f other members of the government came to the Kuznetsk Basin, this must be
done in regard to them too. That was in May 1933.
In the summer of 1934 I had a talk with Muralov in Novosibirsk. Muralov told me on that occasion that it was to be expected that some of the members of the government would come,
as had happened in previous years; in particular he said {I do
not know how he knew this) that the arrival of Molotov was expected and that we must therefore carry out a terrorist act against
Molotov. I also recall that in the beginning of June 19~3 I told
Muralov that Orjoni.ki<lize was expected in the Kuznetsk B-asin~.gnd
Muralov gave me instructions to commit a terrorist act against
Orj onikidze.
·
Vyshinsky: :Muralov gave you instructions?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Having received direct instructions from Muralov"
to prepare for terrorist acts, what practical steps did you take?
Shestov: When I heard that Molotov was corning I or<l.ered Cherepukhin to go immediately to Prokopyevsk personally to direcl
the terrorist act against Molotov. This he did. As he Informed me
later, he instructed Arnold to commit this terrorist act. The prelim-'
inary plan provided for the act to be committed by means .of .a.
car accident, and two suitable spots were selected for it. One spotfor those who know Prokopyevsk-was near Pit No. 5 on the way
to the Mine Management office, and the second sipot was between
the workers' .settlement and Pit No. 3. There is a gully there, not
a ditch, as :M.urq.1ov said, a gully, aibout 15 metres deep.
Vyshinsky: A "ditch" 15 metres deep! Who chose this spot?

220

Shestov: I myself, and Cherepukhin.
l'yshinsky: You yourself sdected this spot?
Shestov: At that time I was working in Prokopyevsk and knew
the topography of the place very well.
l'yshinsky: You chose two spots, and that was the instructions
you gave to the executors-either one place or the other?
Shestov: Only those spots, other places were out of the question.
Vyshinsky: \V.ho toM the executors about the5€ spots?
Shestov: Cherepukhin told the executors. He told me that he
had succeeded in putting Arnold at the wheel.
Vyshinsky: What was Arnold at the time?.
Shestov: Arnold was manager of the garage. He is .an experienced chauffeur. Moreover, as Cherepukhin had told me, he
had even provided for additional guarantees. These were that,
in the event of Arnold funking it for any reason, a truck was to
drive up and collide with the passenger car, hitting it in the side
so that both car and truck would crash into the gully. ·
Arnold did indeed drive Molotov, but he turned the wheel and
so misled the truck driver, who, thinking t'hat Arnold had fallen
into the gully, drove past. As a matter of fact, although he turned
towards the gully, he did not turn sharply enough, and the guards
in the car that followed literally caught the machine with their
hands. Molotov and the others in the car, including Arnold, got
<mt of the already overturned car. This is what Cherepukhin reported to me at the time. •
Analyzing this situation with Cherepukhin, we arrived at the
eonclusion that Arn!)ld had not put enough speed on, and had not
turned sharply enough.
Vyshinsky: At what speed was he to have made the turn?
Shestov: At high speed, but he did it at a low speed.
Vyshinsky: And slowly slid down?
Shestov: No, not slowly, but he did not turn sharply enough,
·with the result that the ·car lost momentum and did not fall with
the speed it wc·uld have had had he turned more sharply. Had he
<lone that the rear car vrnuld not have been able to catch it.
l'yshinsky: The rear car managed to come to the assistance of
the front car. \Vho related this?
. Shestov: Cherepukhin.
Vyshinsky: And Arnold?
Shestov: Arnold told the sto_ry on the same lines later.
Vyshinsky: And did it coincide?
Shestou: Yes.
I'
Vyshinsky: Permit me to ask Arnold.
221

Accused Arnold, you heard Shestov's testimony? Is his testimony
correct?
Arnold: The technical details are not sufficiently depicted.
Vyshinsky: But the fact as such, did it occur?
Arnold: Yes, it occurred.
, Yyshinsky: Do you confirm that?
Arnold: Yes.
The President:. We shall resume the examination of the accused Muralov.
Muralov: Permit me to say something about Shestov's explanation. I will not argue with Shestov about whether it was a ditch
or a gully. . . .
Vyshinsky: Have you yourself been at the spot where this.
ditch is?
Muralov: No, I have never been there.
Vyshinsky: So you have not seen it?
Muralov: No, but there are many gullies in Prokopyevsk, gully
upon gully, hill after hill.
Vyshinsky: If you have not seen the place you cannot argue
about it.
1\Juralov: I will not argue about if.
Secondly, ahout 1932 and Shestov's reference to the attempt
on the life of Orjonikidze. I categorically declare that this belongs
to the realm of Shestov's phantasy. I never gave such instructions.
Vyshinsky: He is mixing things up?
Muralov: I do not know whether he is mixing thin.gs up or
whether he is simply letting his phantasy run away witlihim.-_.
Vyshinsky: Permit me to ask Shestov. Accused Shestov, -have.
you heard that :\furalov repudiates your testimony?
Shestov: I most emphatically insist on my testimony. All the
more do I confirm this because I received exact instructions fro·lfl
Sedov, from Pyatakov and Smirnov that my activities must be
exclusively under the control of ~Iuralov and that I must receivefrom him practical instructions against whom to carry out terrorist acts.
Vyshinskg: Do you confirm that in regard to Mo.lotov, Murp.lov gave you direct instmctions?
Shestov: Yes, and he gave direct instructions in._June 1933
about carrying out a terrorist ad against Orjonikidze as well.
Vyslzinsky: These instructions were given before instructions
concerning a terrorist act against Molotov were given?
Shestov: This was exactly a year earlier.
Vyshinsky: And afterwards,' what instructions did you receive:·
222

from ~Iuralov and did you speak to him about what you had
done?
Shestov: I told him that I had a terrorist group ready in Prokopyev.sk. I precisely conveyed Muralov's instructions to Cherepukhin, who accepted them for guidance. Later C:Q.erepukhin reported to me that he had not committed the terrorist act only because the group which was to fire the r~volver i:ri the coke pit
wavered, and becaust> Orjonikidze didl not use a car then.
Vyshinsky: There were two variants-either to shoot, or a
car smash?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Renee, in reply to Muralov's categorical statement
you declare that this did take place?
Shestov: Yes, it did take place.
Vyshinsky: And did you speak to any of the accused?
S'hestov: No. I had to do only with Cherepukhin.
Vyshinsky: Accused Muralov, do you confirm the references to
the attempt on the life of Comrade Molotov?
M uralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: On this point there is no divergency between you
and Shestov, you confirm this?
M uralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: After the attempt on the life of Comrade Molotovfailed, did anybody inform you of it, report on the reasons for the·
failure? And what did yO'll do after that?
.Jluralou: Shestov reported on the failure. Well, what of it, if it
failed, it failed. Later I organized a group in Tomsk. In that period
of time either Eiche did not arrive or they were not ready,· at all"
events, things remained in the stage of preparation.
Vyshinsky: Also in the stage of preparation?
]furalov: Yes, by Kashkin and Nikolayev. About the groups.
which Shestov directed I confess I do not know. I knew the per-.
sonal composition to some extent of Khodoroze's in Novosibirsk,.
but this group ·did not commit a single terrorist ad.
Vyshinsky: But did it prepare for any? Aforalov: It prepared for an attempt on the life of Eiche.
Vyshinsky: Did you know that at that time preparations wereunder way for other terrorist-acts in other towns, particuhi.rly inl\Ioscow?
Muralov: I knew what was the line in general. Since we had
received such directives and confirmation had come from the centre,
the united centre, then evidently the parallel centre also acted;
but I did not know the composition of the groups or what was.
going on in other towns. I do not know whether the members of
223

1he Siberian centre kne\V. I knew nothing about these groups,
either personally or organizationally.
Vyshinskg: Did you meet Pyatakov, and in what years?
Muralov: At the end of 1927, when we were expelled at the
Congress, I parted from him and after that 'WC met for the first
time in 1934 and later in 1935. After that I neither met nor saw him.
Vyshinsky: When you met Pyatakov did he teH you anything
.about his terrorist ·activities?
·
Muralou: He did not tell me any details.
Vyshinsky: Not details, but, in general, did he tell you?
M uralou: In ,general, he told me that there was such confirmation
.:and that groups were being organized. But I had already heard
-from Ivan Ni'kitich that Dreitzer was engaged on this special task.
Vyshinsky: You knew that?
Muralou: That I knew.
Vyshinsky: And did you also know who Dreitzer was?
Muralov: I also knew Dreitzer. He was a military man.
Vyshinsky: Tell the Court please, <lid you meet Pyatakov after
:the murder of Sergei Mironovich Kirov?
Muralou: I did.
Vyshinsky:·In Moscow?
Muralov: In Moscow.
Vyshinsky: And did you discuss the murder of Sergei Mfr-onovich Kirov?
M~ralou: We did, we discussed the impression.Jhis act had
left on everybodry, and noted that after all, the direc'Hye .y_gs being
carried out; one man had already been removed.
-·
Vyshinsky: One had been removed!
And did not Pyatakov say that now it was the turn of the
others?
1
Muralov: He did not say that now it was the turn of the others;
on the contrary, he said that it was necessary to do this in an
organized way. Generally speaking, we did not say that it must be
each in turn, or all at once; at all events we said that we must be
well prepared, and reproaclling me in this respect, he said that we
must not act in this blunt soldier-like fashion, but cautiously, in
an organized way, and so forth.
---·- -- · - · -Vyshinskg: Cautiously, in an organized way, but act?
.Mural ov: Yes.
VyshinsJ..:y: At the preliminary investigation, when you were
examined at the office of the Procurator of the U.S.S.R., you testified as follows. Permit me to read Vol. XXV, p. 109:
224

.. In 1934, after the murder of Sergei :\1ironovich Kirov, I met
Pyatakov in Moscow and in conversation with me he said: 'One of
those listed in the plan has been wiped off, now it is the turn
of the rest; but we must not be impetuous.'"
Is that right?
Muralov: I confirm it, that is what I said.
Vyshinsky: Is that exachly what was said·?
Muralov: In my opinion there is no contradiction iri what I
said.
.
Vyshinsky: There is no contradiction; I merely want to make
it clear.
Muralov: Only there is the word "plan." ·well, of course, he
is a planning expert.
Vyshinsky: This is of. some importance. Do you confirm
it'?
Muralov: Yes, I confirm it.
Vyshinsky: I have a question to Pyatakov. Accused Pyatakov,
what hav_e you to say on this matteF?
.
Pyatakov: Generally speaking, Muralov's testimony is very
exact. The words, well, this is hrl.s own peculiar terminology, his
phraseology, but in substance, he has conveyed it correctly. We
were discussing exactly what I testified to, that it was not a matter
of single acts, but of organized preparation.
Vyshinsky.• It is not merely a matter of words, the content
is different. Here it was said that one of those who had been
listed in the plan 'had been wiped off. This referred to the
foul murder of Sergei Mironovich Kirov. Accused Muralov, is that
not so?
J!uralov: I do not guarantee that the wording is exact, but that
was the meaning.
Vyshinsky: If w;e are not to cling to words, what is the meaniag?
Mur.alov: Kirov was one of the four concerning whom Trotsky
had given instructions, and the organization of one murder according to that program had been carried out.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): That was the meaning?
. Pyatakov: In substance, it is conveyed correctly.
Vyshinsky: It is not a matter of phraseofogy. The meaning is
that persons were listed, and one of the persons on the list had
~lready been murdered.
Pyatakov: I related exactly what I discussed with Muralov,
what I discussed with Radek, namely, that it was necessary to
renounce individual acts and to proceed to the preparation of organized acts, so you don't act on your own.

225

Vyshinsky: Hence, you deny what Muralov ascribes to
you?
Pyatakov: In substance I confirm what Muralov has said. As
for this or that sentence----! repudiate these sentences.
Vyshinsky: I do not insist on particular words. \Vhat is important for me is the meaning of what you said. We are now in 1937
and that was in 1934.
Pyatakov: In l935.
Vyshinsky: Quite a long time has elapsed, and words may
escape memory. W·hen was that?
Pyatakov: That was in 1935.
The President: It was at the end of 1934.
Vyshinsky: The foul murder of Comrade Kirov was committed
on December 1, 1934. Consequently, it was either in December,
that is, at the end of 1934, or in January 1935. He said that
one had already been w~ped off, one listed in the plan had
already been removed, and now it was the turn of the rest, and
he added-"but we must not'be impetuous." Is that right, accused
Muralov?
Muralov: Yes, that's right. That he spoke about not being impetuous, about terrorism on a large scale to be carried out in an
organized way, that's true.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions to Pyatakov. Accused
Muralov, was it also said that you must act in an or.ganized
way?
Muralov: Yes, it was.
~
Vyshinsky: But was it not said that terrorism in general pi'~
duces no result if only one is killed and- the others remain, and
therefore it is necessary to act at one stroke?
Muralov: Both I and Pyatakov felt that it was no use working by Socialist-Revolutionary, guerrilla methods. We must organize it so as to cause panic at one stroke. We regarded causing
panic and consternation in the leading ranks of the Party as one
of the means by which we would come into power.
Vyshinsky: What did Pyatakov advise you to do?
Muralov: He asked me: "How are things going with you?" I
said: such-and-such is the position. I asked him: "And__ :ho!Y_ ~s
it with you?" He said: "Not bad." I said: "If things are not bad
with you, they are not bad with us." It was then he said to me
that we must not act soldier fashion; that this matter had to be
organized. \Ve could not let our.selves be exposed all at once,
secrecy had to be maintained; it was not the business of Pyatakov to commit terrorist acts himself, but of people who could
226

somehow co,·er up their traces. The conversation on this subject
was short.
Vyshinsky: Short, but the meaning was fairly long.
The President: How did you, accused Muralov, maintain communication by letter with Sedov?
Jfuralov: Communication by letter with Sedov was maintained
through Shestov. She.stov saw Sedov when he was in Berlin and
brought a letter from him. The second letter was brought by an
engineer, a member of the Party-Seidman, a covert Trotskyite who had also been abroad and had seen Sedov. The third letter
I also received with the assistance of Shestov, who had commissioned some German specialist.
The President: Which specialist?
Muralov: I do not know.
The President: What role did 1his German specialist play?
Muralov: I don't know. I sent the letters in code, and I informed . . . .
The President: I am not asking you about the contents. What
interests me is ithe technique cif sending letters from Novosibirsk to
Berlin and vice versa.
.
>
Muralov: I handed the letters to Shestov. The third letter I
received was brought by a specialist.
The President: In what branch was' he a specialist?
M uralov: Mining, he worked in the Kuzbas.
The President: You say that Shestov was connected wHh
German specialists who frequently went to Berlin. I want to
ascertain which German speci::tlists you mean, and what role
they played in maintaining communications between you and
Sedov.
)!uralov: I sent all the correspondence through Shestov.
The President: And did you not inquire how Shestov ensured the
delivery of the letters, whether they reached their destination?
Muralov: Judging by the replies I used to receive, my letters
reached their destination.
The President: But who carried these letters abroad and into
this country: Shestov or other p€rsons?
Jfuralov: Other persons.
The President: Shesitov was only an intermediary?
Muralov: Yes, he only passed them on.
The President: But Who travelled to -Berlin with these letters,_
and who brought you letters from Berlin? \Vere there any intermediaries?
Jfuralov: There were no intermediaries. They were persons
who were sent on business.
The President: On what business?
227

Murolov: Business in !he Kuzbas.
The President: ·why were they sent there?
Muralov: I don·t know.
The P1·esident.- And when you heard about these German
specialists, did you not ,jnquir-e what connection these German
specialists had with the Trotskyite organization m the
Kuzbas?
Muralov: I regarded it merely as an opportunity. Shesto\'
vouched that he would do all he could lo get the letters to their destination.
The President: Shestov vouched that the German specialists
would deliver all these letters at their destination?
111 uralov: Yes.
The President: But why did these German specialists take upon
themselves the function of postmen?
Muralov: I don't know. Seidman is not a German specialist,
he is a Russian.
The President: Accused Shestov, tell the Court briefly: which
Gerinan specialists did you speak to Muralov about?
Shestov: I spoke of spies and divcrsionists.
The President: Why did these German specialists carry Muralov's letters to Sedov arid vice versa?
Shestov: Muralov knew very well when I first reported to him
about my negotiations with Sedov, and in repeated cpmmunications I made to him later that I had entered into an agreement
with the German firin Frohlich-Kliipfel-Dehlmann, had entered
into an agreement with the director of that firm;, and':one of
the points in that agreement was that they would punctualty
deli\'er mail from ·western Siberia to my chief, Lev Sedov,
and back to . me, addressed to me under my pseudonym,
"Alyosha."
The President: How did you establish connections wilh the,
German specialists working in the Kuzbas, what address did you
use, why did they carry out your commissions?
Shestov: They carried out my commissions ibecause, as I have
already stated, I entered into an agreement 'vith ·that firm. Secondly, even before my return from Berlin, engineer Stroilov was
the representative of that firm. \Vhen I arrived I got in tou_ch_wltl:i._
engineer Stroilov and enlisted him for diversive, undermining,
destructive work.
The President: Do you know the names of the foreign specialists
who carried the letters?
Shestov: Yes.
The President: Very wdl. You will tell the Court about it
228

in greater detail when you are examined. \Vhat interests me now
is the following: did .\luralov know that- certain: German specialists were engagrd in carrying . his letters to Sedov and vice
versa~
·
Shestov: Absolutely.
_
The President: Did you mention the names of these specialists
to .\Iuralov?
Shestov: I told him that the arrival of a spy and diversionist
was expected.
The President: But did you mention his name?
Shestov: No.
·
The President: So that he did not know them, and did not meet
them personally?
Shestov: No.
The President: And those German specialists never failed you?
They carried out all your commissions?
Shestov: Yes, very precisely.
The President: Accused Muralov, do you know what kind of
work Drobnis and Norkin were doing at the Kemerovo Chemical
\\·orks and at the Kemerovo coal mines? \V11at was the substance
of their diversive work?
11/uralov: Inasmuch as Drobnis was a member· of the \VestSib~rian centre he, of course, informed the centre, including myself. I think he said that in court today.
The President: He said it, but what I am interested lo know
is whether you knew about this work. You were not there
as the leader of the Wrst-Siberian Tiotskyite ·centre for
nothing.
Jfuralov: I knew.
. The President: Did you know that at the Kemerovo coal rnines
the Trotskyites had gassed the pits and had crea~ed absolutely intolerable conditions of work'!
Muralov: Drobnis was at the Chemical \Votks,_:_,these are undel.·
one trust, anrd the mines are under another trust.
The President: I understand, I ari1 speaking aboutthe Kemerovo
mine.
Jfuralov: I did not know that there they hiid adopted the course
of gassing the Tsentralnaya Pit, and Drobnis did not report this to
me. This occurred when I was already iri prison'..
The President: One of the passages in yciur testimony contains
this sentence: "At the Kemerovo mine the Trotskyites gassed pits
and created intolerable conditions for' the workers.''
},furalov: I learned about ~hat while I was in prison as being a
result of all the undermining Trotskyite work.
Ir
The President: Under the direction of Drobnis and Norkin the
229

'Trotskyites working in the Kemerovo Chemical \Vorks developed
intense wrecking activities. Is that so?
Muralov: Yes.
.
The President: That was under Drobnis' direction?
l\f uralov: Yes. So I was informed.
The President: They, that is, Drobnis and Norkfa, hel<l up the
construction of the main departments. Did Drobnis and Norkin
inform VO/U of this?
Mur~lov: Only Norkin.
The President: But you did know that the wrecking organization was operating in Kemerovo?
Muralov: Yes.
The President: Were the principal wrecking activities of the
Trotskyites at the Kemerovo mine known to you at the time you
directed the \Vest-Siberian centre?
Muralov: That I don't know.
The President: But you did know that there was a group conducting wrecking activities at the Kemerovo mine?
Muralov: I knew it from Drobnis.
The Pres'ident: That is, Drobnis told you, but you did not
know the composition of this group?
· l\furalov: No.
The President: What did they do there concretely?
Muralov: What they did at the time Norkin was there I do
not know.
The President: 'What do you know about wrecking adivities
on tlhe Omsk ~:md Tomsk Railways at the time you w~e .in the
West-Siberian Territory?
~--.. _
Muralou: Only what Boguslavsky fold me. He reported tbat
he was trying to cause jams at the stations.
The President: At what stations?
Muralov: At Eiche Station on the Novosibirsk junction. In
addition they put locomotives out of commission prematurely. f
The President: Your testimony contains the following:
"Boguslavsky, who was connected with the Trotskyite organization on the railways, informed me 'that Trotskyites on the
railways acting on the basis of directives given by our Siberian
centre, were putting locomotives out of commission, disrupting
the traffic schedule and causing jams at the stations, Jhere~­
by delaying the transpoi::-tation of urgent freight." Is that
right?
Muralou: It tis.
The President: And quite lately Boguslavsky carried on wrecking activities on the ~onstruction qf the Eiche-Sokol line?
Murnlov: Yes.
1

230

The President: Ail!d as a result disrupted the construction
job?
},f uralov: Yes.
The President (to Vyshinsky}: Have you any questions?
Vyshinsky (to Muralov): When were you arrested?
Muralov: On April 17, 1936.
Vyshinsky: Prior lo April 17, 1936, fr-0ro the time of your
arrival in Novosibirsk iha<l you ever been arrested?
Muralov: No, never.
Vyshinsky: But during that time you carried on Trotskyite
work?
Muralov: I have said that it was interrupted in 1929 wh~n
part of the Trotskyites were arrested and part capitulated, such
as Radek, Boguslavsky and Sumetsky, and no work was carried

on.
Vyshinsky: And .afterwaros?
Muralov: It was resumed in 1.931.

Vyshinsky: What prompted you_ to fight the Soviet p0wer in
such acute forms as the organization o.f terrorist acts?
Muralov: My fall should be traced back to the time I signed
the first document against the Party. This was the Declaration
of the Forty-Six made in 1923. That was the beginning of my
faJJ., and then I was drawn into the Trotskyite organfaatfon until
I was expelled from the Party and exiled to Western Siberia. I
was, of course, motivated by resentment on behalf of myself and
others. I was, so to speak, embittered.
Vyshinsky: Was this the main reason for your subsequent
work?
Muralov: No, I would not say that. It was the dissent of a
political worker. Political differences counted with me first of all
and not personal ones.
Vyshinsky: Are your political views determined by your adberence to Trotskyism?
·
Muralov: Yes, they were set forth in the well known platform
submitted to the Fifteenth C-Ongress..
Vyshinsky: And you continued to a<'fillere to this up to the
most recent time, and, remaining on these political positions, you
waged the struggle?
Muralov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I am interested in knowing why you decided to
give truthfuil testimony. Examhcing the reoord of the preliminary
investigation, I _see that at a number of interrogations you denied
any part in underground work. It that so?
Muralo11: Yes, up to December 5. Eight months.
I,
Vysh'insky: \Vhy, then, in the end did you decide to give, and
231

did give, truthful testimony? Explain the motives that ,led you to
the decision to lay everything on the table-if you have laid
everything on the table.
1'.furalou: I think there were threre reasons which held·me back
and induced me to deny everything.
One reason is ·political, and profoundly serious; two are of
exclusively personal character. I shall begin with the least
i·mportant, with my character. I am very hot-tempered and resentful. That is the first reason. \Vhen I was arrested, I became embittered with resentment.
Vyshinsky:. \Vere you ba<lly treated?
Jfuralou: I was deprived of my .liberty.
Vyshinsky: But perhaps rough methods were used against
you?
Muralov: No, no such methods were used. I must shy that
in Novosibirsk and here I was treated politely and no cause
for resentment was given: I was treated very decently and
politely.
Vyshinsky: \Vas it the fact of arrest itself?
Muralov: Instead of using other methods, they took me and
put me in prison. Such is my nature.
Vysh'insky: You do not like to be put in prison?
Muralov: No, I do not. The second reason is also of a personal nature. It is my attachment to Trotsky. It began when he
was People's Commissar and I was commander of the l\·foscow
~Hlitary Area. Then there were political affairs: a whole group of
my comrades \Vere in opposition to the Party, the majority of-'.them
being authoritative comrades \vell known to me, like I. N. Smirno\T:
whom I greatly respected!, V. N. Yakovlyeva, whom I regarded
as a very clever woman, and quite a number of people who sup·
ported Trotsky. Of course I too was ·drawn into this business and
began t-0 meet them and in the course of the work not only came
close to them politically, but became friends. This was the second
circumstance which restrained me, so to speak. I considered it morally inadmissible to betray Trotsky, although I did not subscribe
to the directive on terror and destrudion. I had hea<rtpangs all the
lime at the very thought of it; I considered it wrong. Friendship
and political m-0tives were involved. The thiI"d p-0int was-well, as
you kno\v, in every" affair something is carried too far..
--- -. - And I rE.'as-0ned that if I continued to remain a Trotskyite,
especially when the others were quitting-some honestly arid
otJ1ers dishonestlv-at any rate thev were not standard-bearers
of counter-revolution, but i-there w;s a "hero" for youl . . . If I
kept on lhis way, I might become the stan<lard-ibearer of counterrevolution. This frightened me terribly. At that time cadres, in-

an

232

dustry. the national economy were gro·wing up before my
eyes . . . . I am not blind and I am not such a fanatic.
And - I said lo myself,- almost after eight months, that I must
suhmit to the interesls of the state for which I had fought for
twc11ty-three years, for which I had fought actively in three revolutions, when my life hung by thread dozens of times.
\Vas I to remain and continue to aggrq.vate the affair? My
name would serve as a banner to those who were still in the ranks
of counter-revolution. This was what decided me, and I said:
\·ery well, I will .go and tell the whole truth. I do not know
whether my answer has satisfied you or not.
Vyshinsky: TheTe were no prospects in the struggle?
Muralov: The danger of remaining in thesie positions, danger
to the state, to the Party, to the revolution.
Vyshinsky: That's all quite clear. I have no more questions toask.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in t_he negative). ·
The President: Adjournment for twenty minutes.

a

*
Commandant: The Court is coming. Please rise.
The President: \Ve shall proceed to examine the accused
Shestov.
..
.
Vyshinsky: Accused Shestov, will you tell the Court of your
criminal activities as briefly as possible?
Shestov: My criminal activities began at the end of 1923. As
a student of the \Vorkers' Faculty of the :Moscow Mining A~ad­
emy I was an active advocate o.f the Trot.skyite platform. ·
·
In 1924 I deceived the Party for the first lime, when ·in the
autumn I declared at a Party meeting that I had abandoned
Trotsk;.ism. At the end of 1925 I again began to fight .the Party
actively. I was at that time placed' in charge of an illegal printshop. I printed Trotskyite literature.
In 1930 I worked in Novosibirsk, and in 1931 I was sent to
Moscow on official business. About the end' of Februa.ry I learned
that a large group of directors were about to go to Germany .. I
was a member of the board of the East•2rn and Siberian Coal Trust.
I got in touch >vi.th the chairman of the hoard and asked him to
help me go to Germany. I had heard that Pyatakov would head the
group, I received permission to go. I reached Germany in the beginning of May.
I must go back a little to say that in 1926 I met Trotsky
several times personally. That same year I met Pyatakov. And .so.
at the beginning or in the middle of May I was in Berlin.
233

1 was alone with Pyatakov in his office, and when our business was over I asked him: "How S'hould one interpret your
statement that was published in the press? Was it a result of genuine renunciation of Trotskyism, or was it a forced step?"
Pyatakov asked me whether I had read the latest literatur('
on sale in Berlin. I said that I hoped to acquaint my?elf with it.
"And as to the question you aske<l," Pyatakov said, "I advise you
to discuss the matter with I. N. Sroirnov."
That is what I did. Some two days later I got in touch with
Smirnov.
What Smirnov then told me was this: the situation in the
Soviet Union :has sharply ohanged, and I must understand that an
open struggle was impossible. The task of the Trotskyites now
was to win the Party's confidence and then to renew the attack
with doubled and trebled force.
He told me that negotiations were going on in Berlin and that
there was no doubt that by the time we left for the Soviet Union
new program and tactical questions would be elaborated, as he
then expressed i<t, for the very latest course.
He asked me whether I remembered Sedov. I replied that I
had had no organizational contacts with Sedov, but that I remembered that in 1926 I attended several secret meetings in the Bauman District at which Sedov was present, and that I remembered
his face. He said: Sedov also remembers you.
Smirnov advised me to iliscuss the new and: latest course iI1
detail with Sedov. I readily con~ented. During my meeting with
Sedov I asked him what our leader, Trotsky, thoughlor what were
the specific tasks. he pla~d before us Trotskyites. Sed10v :-began
by saying that it was no use sitting and whistling for fair weathei;;
we must proceed with ahl forces and means at our disposal to an
active policy of discrediting Stalin's leadership and Staain's policy.
Further, Sedov said that his father ib.eld: that the only corr,rct
way, a difficult one but a sure one, was forcibly to remove Stalin
and the leaders of the government by means of terrorism. ·
Then I remarked that this was partly true because we had really got into a blind alley. Therefore it was necessary either to disarm
or to map out a new path of struggle.
Seeing that I was being influenced by his words, he switched
the conversation to a new subject. He asked me whether· I -knew
any of the directors of Ge:rman firms, Dehlmann in particular. I
told him that I remernlbered such a name, that he was a director
of the firm of Frohlich-<Kliipfel-Dehlmann. This firm was rendering
technical assistance, under a contract, in sinking mines in the Kuzbas. Sedov advised me to get in touch with that firm and -make
the acquaintance of Herr Dehlmann.
234

I asked him why I should get in touch with him. He said
that this firm was of help in· sending mail to the Soviet Union. I
then said: "Are you advising me to make a deal with the firm?"
He said: "What's terrible about that? You must understand that if
they are doing us a favour why should not we do them a favour
and furnish them with certafo information."
I said: "You are simply proposing that. I should become a
spy." He shrugged his shoulders and said: "It is absurd to use
words like that. In a fight it is unreasonable to he as squeamish as
that. If you acoept terrorism, if you accept destructive undermining
activity in industry, 1 absolutely fail to understand why you cannot agree with this." I said: "It is hard for me to solve this problem,
I will discuss this subject with I. ·N. Smirnov and then I will give
you a reply one way or another." After this there was a conversation with Sedov in which .the probability of my meeting Sedov again
was mentioned. He asked me when I was going to the Soviet
Union. I said that I intended to go in the autumn. He said: That's
good, I can send several letters, particularly to Muralov; the old
man will be very glad to hear from Lev Davidovich. I asked: How
can I get in touch with you? He said: I will connect you with a
trusted person and you will always be able to get in touch with
me through him. With this my conversation with Sedov in the
Nikolai Restaurant came to a close and -we went to Berlin. We
got out of the car in the neighbourhood of \Vittenberig Pfatz and
went into the Baltimore Restaurant and sat down at a table. Sedov
wen'!: out for a while and came back with a man dressed as a waiter
and introduced him to me as Mr. Schwartzmann. He introdluced me
as Alyosha. We looked at each other and he said: when you want
to get in touch with me Mr. SC'hwartzmann can conv·ey your messages. \Vith this the conversation came to an end as Sedov said
that we could not stay at that place long.
In the beginning of Ju~e 1931, ~fter I had assimilated all that
I had heard from Smirnov and Sedov, I arrived ait the conclusion
that it was too late to retreat. Smirnov and the others knew me as
a convinced Trotskyite, the more so that personal association with
Sedov, Smirnov and Pyatakov made us more intimate and I decided that I wouid be at the side of my leaders.
I met Sinirnov about the middle of July and he asked me
bluntly: ."Well, how is your' mood?" I tol<d him that I had !lO
personal ·mood, but I did as our leader Trotsky taughf us-stand
at attention and wait for orders. Smirnov then said that the negotiations had come to an end, that definite decisions had been
adopted which could be summed up as follows: first, that Pyatakov
had· proved that the industrialization carried out by the Stalin goveniment ha·d failed, that the factories di:d not pay and that they
1

235

could not"exist without large state subsidies, that these large overhead costs would he a heavy burden on the working class, that we
are morally fully justific<l in carrying on destructive undermining
wo1;k and in enlisting for this purpose all the hostile forces, particularly the counter-revolutionary minded section of the engineers.
Then he passed on to the question of terrorism. He said that a
decision had been adopted to get into power by organizing assassinations, by acts of violence against Stalin, his Political Bureau and
his government. On receiving a reply from me in the affirmative.
that I agreed wholehear<tedly to carry on this work, he said that I
would receive pra-ctical instructions r-egarding terrorism and undermining work from Pyatakov. He wanted to go, but I detained him
and asked: But Ivan Nikitich, Sedov ordered me to establish connections with the firm of Frohlich-Kliipfel-Dehlmann; he
bluntly told me to establish connection with the firm that was
engaged in espionage and diversive work in the Kuzbas. In that
case, I said; I will be a spy and a diversionist. To this he replied:
Stop slinging big words like ·'spy" and "diversioniSJt" about. He
then went on to say that every convinced Trofskyite understood
th,z meaning of the word "terrorism," and that oul' people wouM
not engage in special discussions on this; but if the question of des"
tructive undermining work were put to them not everybody would
agree to it; they would start a discussion; meanwhile time is passin~
and it is necessary to act more quickly. 'What is there that surprisies
you in that we consider it possible to overthrow the Stalin leadership and mobilize. all the counter-revolutionary forces in the Kuzhas? He said: \Vhat do you find terrible in enlisting German ~iver­
sionists for this work, the more so that Gerrnan·specialists arc madea fuss of in the Soviet Union, and everybody literally stands in
awe of every word they say. In his conversation with me he used
a number of other words. He insisted that there was no other way.
\Ve needed very strong connections with Trotsky and his bureau
and, ·whether we liked it or not, we had to agree to this. After thi.;;
conversation I consented to establish connection with this firm.
Vyshinsky: What year was that?
Shestov: That wa'> about the middle of June 1931.
Vyshinsky: Did both meetings take place in 1931?
Shestov: Yes, in the spring.
Vyshinsky: Did you stay in Berlin after that?
---- - Shestov: I remained abroad until the beginning of November;
I went to London..
·
·
Vyshinsky: And then you met Sedov before you returned
lo fhe Soviet Union? Generally speaking, did you try to meet
Sedov?
Sbestov: Yes.
236

Vyshinsky: And did you hold similar conversations during
those meetings, or did you talk of other things?
Shestov: As I agreed with him at the time . . . .
Vyshinsky: You must answer that question briefly. You are
giving a lot of details which at present, it seems to me, do nnt
interest us particulady. 1 ask you, when you rem<tined in Berlin
until l\ovem.ber 1931, did you or did you not meet Sedov again'l
Sliestov: Yes, I met him again twice.
Vyshinsky: \Yhat was t'he subject of your first meeting?
Shestov.: At the first meeting I gave him a brief account of
all the conversations I had had subsequently with Smirnov and
Pyatakov. I told him briefly how I intended to begin the practical organization of terrorist and undermining activities, arid
whom I intended to draw into this work. And he then told me
that he would request me to bring letters for Muralov and
Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: And at _the second meeting afh~r that?
Shestov: \Ve agreed then that I- would receive these letters
concealed in the soles bf shoes. . . .
Vyshinsky: That you have already told. You receivied two
shoes in which letters were concealed and brought them tQ Moscow. You have already told this here..
Shestov: No, I have not yet told the following: I had a meeting
with Pyatakov in the middle of June 1931 at which Pyatakov
specified the tasks I would have to perform in the Kuznetsk.
Basin.
Vyshinsky: \Vhere was this meeting?
Shestov: In Berlin.
Vyshinskg: In Berlin?
Shestov: Yes. The second meeting ....
Vyshinsky: \Vhat did he specify?
Shestov: He also spoke of the necessity of adopting measures
fo stop the industrialization of the country-to stop, is what he
said. He also said: "You personally are entrusted with the execution of a terrorist act against Eidhe."
Vyshinsky: He told you that while you were stil!l in Berlin?
Shestov: Yes. I was given this job of committing a terrorist
act and terrorist activities by 'Pyatakov in Berl~n. He also s.poke
of the necessity of enlisting aU hostile forces, particularly engineers and technicians. He said bluntly that there was plenty
of human material to be found. in the Kuzbas, including people
with counter-revolutionary tendencies.
Vyshinsky: Did you have any more rpeetings with Sedov after
the meeting with Pyatakov?
237

Shestov: I do not understand the question.
Vyshinsky: After thi<; meeting with Pyatakov; did you have
any other meetings with Sedov?
Shestov: I have already spoken of this. That was a meeting
in October.
Vyshinsky: Very well. Is that all?
Shestov: Those were all the conversations I had in 1931 with.
lcad1crs of the Trotskyite organization.
Vyshinsky: After that you left for lhe Kuzbas via Moscmv?
Shestov: Yes. In Nov"ember I left for the Kuznetsk Basin, but in
accordance with Sedov's and Smirnov's instructions, I had talks
with the fhm of Frohhlch-Kliipfel.
Vyshinsky: What were your instructions and how d~d you
carry tihem out?
Shestov: Before my departure I met ·11he director of this firm.
Dehlmann, and his ,assistant Koch. Vyshinsky: What was the essence of your conversation?
Shestov: The essence of the conversation with the heads of
the firm o.f Frohlich-Kliiptfel-Dehlmann was as follows: first.
on supplying secret information through the representatives of
thi<; firm working in the Kuznetsk Basin and on the organization of
wrecking and diversive work together with the Trotskyites. It
was also said that the firm in its turn would help us.
Vyshinsk!f: Who advanced this proposition?
Shestov: This proposition was advance<;} during the conversation by the <lirector of the firm, Dehlmann, Sedov's friend.
Vyshinsky: You talked to him about diversive a'!ld crintlnaI
activities in the Kuzbas?
----- Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did Dehlmann say by \vhat means they would help
you?
Shestov: He said that they already had their people. . . . 1
Vyshinsky: Where?
Shestov: In the Kuznetsk Basin. And that thev could send more
peoplE upon the demand of our organization, while the Trotskyite
organization would render every possible assistance to these
divernionists. In its turn, the firm undertook to maintain communications with the organizations of the Trot.skyites in the Soviet
Union, including me.
--- - -- - - - -Vyshinsky: That was on one side, and with whom on the
other?
Shestov: On the other with Sedov. The firm undertook punctually to deliver to me letters marked "Alyosha," as well as
return letters. They would in every way help the Trotskyiites to
come to power, and we were to sign a contract with the finn
238

for planning the sinking of mines and for fairly large orders for
equipment. Then I was told that they had their agent,. Stroilov,
in the :Kuznetsk Basin and that I should get in touch with Stroilov
,...-hen I arrived.
Vyshinsky: What I would like to know, is why this firm which
promised assistance in the corning into power was interested in a
contract for sinking shafts.
Shestov: By that time the contract with this firm had been annulled..
Vyshinsky: And so you promised to assist?
Shestov: Yes, I promised to assist in concluding a new contract.
Vyshinsky: In whose n.:ame did you promise?
Shestov: In the name of the Trotskyite organization.
Vyshinskg: That was unofficially; but could you render any
assistance officially?
Shestov: At that time I was a member of the Board of the
Eastern and Siberian C<>al Trust and therefore I could certainly
render the required assistance.
Vyshinsky: Officially, as a member of the Board of the Eastern
and Siberian Coal Trust? And you promised that?
Shestov: Yes.
l'yshinsky: Because at fllat time the contract had been annulled?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Was it Dehlmann who told you fllat?
Shestov: Yes.
Yyshinsky: That Stroilov was in the.Kuznetsk Basin?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And that he was Dehlmann's agent?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinskg: And were you not interested in knowing how
Stroilov, who was in the Kuznetsk Basin, had become Dehlmann's
agent?
.
Shestov: Before that Stroilov had lived in Germany a fairlv
long time.
Vyshinsky: You knew that?
Shestov: Yes, I did.
Vyshinsky: You knew it. In any case there was no special
talk oa the subject?
Shestov: No, I accepted it as pilausible.
Vyshinsky: Did you have any special talk with Dehlmann that
time?
Shestov: No, it was pofoted out that people who came :from
Germany should be directed to Stroilov and would be sent fo
the various mines according to his instructions.
1

239

Vyshinsky: In what capacity did Stroilov work?
Shestov: As chief of one of the departments.
.
Vyshinsky: \Yhy was it necessary for the people whom Dehlm:rnn was to send to you in the Kuzbas to go to Stroilov and not to
you directly?
.Shestov: In the first place in the conversation with Dehlmann
I said that I did not speak German. In the second place for Stroilov, as a specialist, it would be more convenient to deal with
specia'lists. In the third place I had already marked out for myself the way I would carry on my undermining activities-I would
go to one of the ma.in mimes of fhe Kuznetsk Basin-to Prokopyevsk.
Vyshinsky: And where d'id Stroilov work?
Shestov: Stroilov worked in the head office of the Kuzbas Coal
Trust in Novosibirsk. I said to Dehlrnann that we would have to
organize this through Stroiil<YV, through Novosfuir&k..
Vyshinsky: That means you considered it would be more convenient to conduct this operation through Novosibirsk than, say,
thrO'llgh Prokopyevsk?
Shestov: Certainly.
Vyshinsky: Did you nave any more meetings with that firm
afterwards?
·
Shestov: I met them but we did not carry on conversations
regar<lil.ng diversive acts and espionage.
Vyshinsky: So your conversation •was frank?
Shestov: Yes, it was plain tailk.
Vyshinsky: In what language wa·s tihe conversatiD'Il q:mducted?
Shestov: He spoke German and I RuS:Sian. Koch ·acte.d._~s
interpreter; he had lived in the Soviet Union for quite a lo·ng fime
a.nd spoke fairly fluently.
Vyshinskg: Koch was well informed about the matter?
Slzestov: Yes. He was a close assistant and had been the firm's
representative in the Donetz Basin.
f
Vgshinsky: For matters which concerned-the finn, matters
concerning production and all other matters as well?
Shestov: Certainrlv.
Vyshinskg: Didn~t you have any further conversations with
Dehlmann on this subject of diversive acts and espionage?
Shestov: No.
_____ _
Vyshinsky: You left for the U.S.S.R. after t'hat?
Shestov: No. I left at the beginning of November 1931.
Vyshinsky: And when did you leave for England?
Shestov: In the middle of November 1931.
Vyshinsky: Before the conversation with the firtp of Dehlmanil
<>r afterwards?
·
240

Shestov: I concluded my conversation with the firm and then
I left for England.
Vyshinsky: Afterwards you returned from England and 1€'ft
for the U.S.S.R.?
Shcstov: Yes.
l'yshinsky: How long were you in Berlin on your return trip?
Shestov: About three weeks.
Vyshinsky: And during those three weeks you did not see
Deh.lmann any more?
Shestov: Maybe I .cHd see him but again I repeat that I held
no further conversations \VHh him on the suhject of diversive
acts and espionage.
Vyshinsky: During thie three weeks you were in Berlin after
your return fr<Xm Englam:l did YOfll see either Pyatakov, Sedov or
Smirnov?
Shestov: No. By that time Pyatakov wasn't there and Smirnov
wasn't there.
·
Vyshinsky: Was Sedov there?
Shestov: I met Sedov twice at the end of October.
Vyshinsky: Now that is all clear. And after that you left for
the U.S.S.R. witlh those shoes and the letters?
Shestov: Quite right. I brought the shoes across safely and
transmitted the letters.
Vyshinsky: We've already heard about that. Where did you
go after that?
Shestov: To the Kuznetsk Basin, to Novosibirsk.
Vyshinsky: After that conversation with Pyatakov to w!hioh you
also testified previously?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Briefly, what was the gist of this conversation with
Pyatakov? \Ve have already heard about it, we only need it now
for the sake of the continuity of your story.
Shestov: The conversation was very brief. I transmitted the
letter, he wished me sueces'S and that was the end of the conversation.
Vyshinsky: Did you speak about Dehlmann?
Sltestov: I didn't mention it to him. Nor did I mention it at
our second meeting.
Vyshinsky: For what reason?
Shestov: It was clear to me that Smirnov had commissioned. . . .
Vyshinsky: You simply did not eonsider it necessary?"
Shestov: Quite true.
Vyshinskg: And was Smirnov in Moscow at the time/?
Shestov: That I do not remember. Smirnov did not advise me
241

to get in touch with him and said that even if there were letters
in his name I should transmit them to Pyatakov.
Vgshinsky: I understand. I'm interested in the following question: did you get in touch with the Dehlmann firm upon Smirnov's
and Sedov's instructions?
Shestov: Yes.
Vgshinsky: Did you reach an agreement with the firm?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Was Smirnov in Berlin at the time of your final
agreement with the f\rm? You saw Sedov only in October? Did
you ta[k to him about Dehlmann?
Shestov: Yes, I did.
Vyshinsky: But Smirnov, who h?d given you the instruct-ions,
did not know how you had carrie;d them out?
Shestov: No.
Vyshinsky: When you reached Moscow didn't you consider it
necessary to hunt up S.mirnov and teH him how you had carried
out the instructions?
Shestov: No. There was no necessity for it. I remembered Smirnov's words that I should not get in touch with him unnecessarily
and there was no need for •it.
Vyshinsky: That means for reasons of secrecy?
Shestov: Exclusively.
.
Vyshinsky: And then you left for the Kuznetsk Basin?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Proceed.
Shestov: Upon my arrival in Novosibirsk I got in touch with
~.furalov.
~
Vyshinsky: You spoke of that too.
- Shestov: Yes, but I wis:h to make one important correction to
Muralov's testimony. \Vhen I handed over the letter I ga_ve him
a detailed report, particufarly on connections with Pyatakov,
Sedov and Smirrn:iv, and a1lso the spying firm. ·when I gave him
this information Murnlov said that perhaps my assistance would
be required in deciphering the letter, and for this reason he asked
me to come to Obskaya Street the next day. I came to that street
at 10 ip.m. Muralov was already there.
Vyshinsky: "What was located on Obskaya Street?
Shestov: The street runs along the riverside . . . .
Vyshinsky: That p.Iace was agreed upon; was somrone's-aparf-ment located there?
Shestov: No. \Ve simply met on a street -corner. In. one of
our first meefings we had met at the same plaee on the side street
. and this time we agreed to meet at the same plaee.
Vyshinsky: That means you agreed?
242

Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: On the date and hour?
Shestov: I transmitted the letter to him one day and he told
me to come around on the fallowing day.
Vyshinsky: Does that mean the time was agreed upon?
Shesiov: Yes. I alrea:dy sa·id, 10 p.m.
Vyshinsky: At 10 p.m. you turned up on Obskaya Street and
~luralov also turned up?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: _Proceed.
.
Shestov: Muralov told me that 'he ihad managed to decipher
the personal note from the old mrui Lev Davi'dovich, but that the
long letter· with •its arithmetic made his eyes h1Uxt. He asked me
to decipher the letter. He then gave me the letter and the code. In
three days I deciphered the letter.
So first of all two 'letters had been received then: a letter from
Trotsky and a letter from the foreiign bureau whicJh I personally
deciphered. The gist of the letter was as follows: it was a decision
of -the foreign bureau for the members of the Union centre. The
letter con\Sli.sted of three sections: the first section was an introduction where the internal situation in the Soviet Union was depicted
in very dark and gloomy colours. It was stated that the railways were in a rruined starte, agriculture was declining, etc., etc.
7
\ \ hat was the conclusion drawn from this? It was stated that
it was now necessary to develop destructive and underminmg
work on a broad scale. They basied themselves on the same considerations whic'.h, as I have testified, I had heard from Sedov and
from Pva.takov and from Smirnov.
The-second part affirmed the necessity of forci:bly removing the
existing leadership--Sfalin and the Stalinist Political Bureau. In
the same letter group terrorist acts were recommended.
Vyshinsky: You deciphered this and informed Muralov?
Sh~stov: I passed it on to Muralov.
Vyshinsky: When?
Shestov: Three days later I met Muralov and transmitted the
letter to him.
Vyshinsky: What happened next?
Shestov: Next I commenced concrete practical work. I began by
recruiting the iengineer Stroilov. Coming to his apartment I put
the question bluntly. I said that I knew of his connections with
the Frohlich-Kliip:fel-Dehlmann firm. Therefore I told him
pointblank that there was no need for him to lay down his arms
but that he must again begin active destrudive and disruptive
work. It wasn't important for me to enlist Stroilov alone. \Vhat
was important was to enlist his confederates. I knew that he
243

enjoyed considerable authority among a number of engineers.
I was qui'Le sure that they were also linked by counter-revolutionary work. I warned him: Don't think of informing the G.P.U.
about me. I possess sufficient authority in the West-Siberian Territory and nobody wiU believe you. But if I teH what I know
about your work, you are sure to be arrested immediately.
-Stroilov was perplexed and told me he wouldl give his answer
on the following day. The next day Stroilov said that he agreed
to fake part in our organization. I told him that we must not
scatter our efforts in our undermining and destructive work, but
shollid eoncentraie our work in the three principal mines: the
Anzhero-Sujens:k, the Lenin andl the Pro:kopyevsk. As for the
Kemerovo Mine, we arranged with him that we would keep it in
bad grace, and as we had our people in the office of the Kuzbas
Coal Trust we would try to retard the development of this mine so
as to deprive the chemical industry of a local fuel base. We would
not need people on the spot as this work could he carried on in the
office of the Kuzbas Coal Trust. The main line then adopted was
that the undermining and destructive wor.k would be carried on by
Strofilov, on the one hand, and by a Trotskyite organization that I
wcmM form, on the ofuer. Stroilov was to draw up a plan along
the folllowing lines.
1) To disrupt new mine construction and the reconstruction of
old mines that was being carried on.
2) To strive to organize construction work on new mines and on
:mines under reconstruction in such a way that the new units
would commence operation piecemeal. We had in mind to delay
production reaching the designed capacities.
"'=
3) To introduce such systems of coal cutting as would-i:esult
in maximum losses and were calculated to cause underground
fires.
4) Deliberately to disrupt the preparation of new levels
and new mining fields, for the purpose of dealing a crushing 'bloi\';·
not only to the collieries and iron mines of the Kuznetsk Basin,
but to the iron and steel industry of the Urals and \Vestern Siberia
as well.
5) De;liberately to disrupt preparatory work for the pUTpose
of creating a [apse of time ibetween clearing work arrd preparatory
operations.
6) To intensify i'he destruction of maohinery by mo-re effrefive
measures, especially the machinery directly employed for delivery;
hauling and hoisting of coal. By these acts we not only intended
to disrupt the plan of coal output, but to arouse the anger of the
workers.
7) Finally, the last point was to sabotage shock brigade work
244

and subsequently sabotage the Stakhanov movement, and mistreat
the workers.
As we had arranged wJ.th Stroilov, •he was to have drawn up
this plan, specified for each enterprise, according to O'bject by
January or February. I caJille to Novosibirsk at that time. Stroilov
showed me the plan. I went through it. I reported on it to Muralov
and afterwards returned it, hut I had the whoile scheme in my
head just as well as Stroilov had it. We are old hands in the coal
business, we know every nook a•nd cranny in the Kuzbas, and we
said: the plan has been endorsed, it is time .to set to work. And so
we selected the people who were to carry out the plan. At fh.e
Anzhero-Sujensk Mirie, Stroilov was to enlist the chief engineer
Andreyev. My friend Oleshko, an old Trotskyite, was also there,
and he was to ensure that the destructive work would be carried

out.
As for Prokopyevsk, I underl:ook the destruction work on the
new mine construction jobs. In regard to mining operations, we decided that we ought to enlist Ovsyannikov. We arrived at :this conclusion because, although Ovsyannikov was not a member of our
organization, he was the sort of manager who left everyihing to the
engineers and did not do anything himself, and hie could qiiickly
be converted into a Trotskyite. Stroilov and I did all we could to
get Ovsyannikov transferred. At that time I spoke about Ovsyannikov to the directors, to Kokin and to Moissey Lvovich. The latter
helped me. We used to go round saying that Shevohenko could
not hand[e a mine that was ·developing so fast as the Prokopyevsk mfoe. It is true that Shevohenko was not capable enough
to handle such a job, and' so, in May 1932, Ovsyannikov came to
Prokopyevsk. Now I will deal with what we did to carry out this
plan.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat positive results did you get from Stroilov?
Shestov: As I have said already, he drew up the plan and this
elaborated plan was accepted; we reached an agreement and all
that sort o<f thing.
Vyshinsky: You said that he would give his answer on the
following day?
Shestov: Yes.
Vgsllinskg: And you immediat-ely set down to business?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky {to Stroilov): Accused Stroifov, I want to verify this
part of Shestov';s statement. Were you a long time in Germany?
· Stroilov. Over a year. ·
Vyshinsky: How were you enrolled there?
Stroilov: Not by the Dehlmann firm but by engineer Wiister.
Jfo was a prominent engineer with a high sociai position. He told
245

me that he had contact with certain political and industrial circles.
He enrolled me.
Vyshinsky: In what capacity?
Stroilov: As a pcrnon who was to carry out destructive and
wrecking work on •behalf of Germany.
Vyshinsky: On hehalf of whatinstitution? It is not just a question of the state; a state consists of various institutions. To put it
plainly, you were connected with the German intelligence service?
Stroiloz>: Directly?
Vyshinsky: No, through this eng•ineer 'Viister.
Stroilov: Through the medium of others?
Vyshinslq1: Well, through the medium of others if you like.
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: But where does the Dehlmann firm come in?
Stroilou: 'I1he Dehlmann fiI1lll also knew me.
Vyshinsky: It also knew you, or it also enrolled you?
Stroilov: No, it was Wilster who enrolled me. But apparently
the Dehlmann firm knew that I had been enrolled by engineer
Wilster.
Vyshinsky: And so the Dehlmann firm was entifled to regard
you as its agent? That is how I understand you.
.
Stroilov: Another firm might have done so if Wilster had given
it mv name.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, what Shestov said ht~re was correct,
or was it not?
Stroilou: As a matter of fact I was enrolled not by Dehlmann
but by \Vi1ster, but substantially it was correct.
Vyshinsky: Now for the second question: when Shefilov came
to the Kuzbas after his return from abroad, <l.id he really co·mC-to
see you in yO'llr aparhnent and propose that you do wrecking
work jointly with him?
Stroilou: Yes, now as regards Shestov, when he came to see me
in my apartment: in answer to my puzzled ob.iection that I was far/
removed from their Trotskyite work within the Party and
that I could not conceive what contact there could be between
myself, a non-Party engineer, _and the Trotskyite organization, he
replied that this question, the work within the Party, was a- survival from a stage already passed, and that now the tasks that
had been set them by the Trotskyites and the Germans were the
same as those that confronted me. There was no diiffereiiee\vl:ial~­
ever.
Vyshinsky: Did you agree with this?
Stroilov: Yes, I was convinced by it. ·what Shestov spoke about
was diversive and wrecking work w,hich had r-eally nothing in
common with any kind of ideas-he spoke to me about this too,
246

referring in particular to the Ramzin trial-that it had nothing in
common whatever and that he was just as much a wrecker as I.
l'yshinsky: Did this convince you?
Stroilov: No, it was not this that convinced me. \Vhat convinced
me was that, knowing what type of man he was. . . .
l-'yshinsky: What type of man?
Stroilov: He would have handed me over. to the G.P.U. I was
simply scared.
Vyshinsky: So he julSt terrorized you?
Stroiloz>: That's what he said. In this respect he is right.
1l'yshinsky: !So what di<l he, tell you, how did he get a hold
over you?
.
Stroilov: By main force, so to speak. He mentioned the firm to
which I had given some aissistanoe before Shestov's arrival.
Vyshinsky: What kind of assistance?
Stroilov: The assistance I gave was as follows: this firm had
been conducting certain jobs in the U.S.S.R., at Solikamsk and in
the Kuzbas; it had to renew its contract and undertake certain
new jobs. Accordingly, the technical consultation which I gave in
connection with the sinking of shafts at Shcheglovka and P1onmy-in making this consultation I gave ·preference to the Dehlmann firm as compared with the Thyssen firm.
Vyshinsky: Did you receive anything for doing this"?
Stroilov: No, absolutely nothing.
Vyshinsky: But why did you do it then, just for love?
Stroilov: No, not just for love. Certain things had happened
before that whi'c:-:h forced me to do this.
Vyshinsky: Mention the most important and essential of them.
\\'hat were they?
Stroilov: There were a number of important and essentia!l factors.
Vyshinsky: \Vhy did you give them such preference free of
charge?
Stroilov: Citizen Procurator, in order to answer this question
I must <leail with the main subject; that will be a long slory.
Vyshinsky: You were in the hands of this firm? How did you
fall into their clutches?
Stroilov: I fell into their clutches . . . on the recommendation
Qf h•;o Germans-von Berg and Dehlmann. These were persons
who were trying-well, how should I put it?-to brea:k me in. The_
method they employed was as follows: von Berg accused me of
carrying on Communist agitation on occasions when I visit€id fhe
mines to invite foreign specialJ.ists. I will not deny that in general
I did taik a:bout the goodJ sides of life in the Soviet Union, such
as problems of daily life, trade union movement, and so forth.
2~7

Berg stated that he was aware of a case where I had talked with
workers. There were cases of my having talked with workers....
Vyshinsky: Diel you actually carry on Communist agitation?
Stroilov: No. \Ve were categorically forbidden to engage in any
political work abroad, 1but Berg said there 11ad ·been two cases of
my speaking about this when I was inviting specialists. I remember
that during one such meeting with specialists two plain-clothes
men of the German criminal police had appeared.
Vyshinsky: That is the secret po.Hee?
Stroilov: They were in plain clothes, how could I tell? This was
in the presence of a comrade, the Communist Fritch, and he
talked with them. And in the second case, as I have already· stated
here, there was a passport examination, which was a very unusual thing for the Germans. They take things easy in this respect.
In Dortmund also a plain-clothes man approached me in the lobby
of the hotel and asked me to show him my passport. Thatis why
I gathered from what Berg had said and from these two cases
-one before the CO'Ilversiation wiifh Berg and the other after itthat I was ibeing shadowed, that I was being intimidated. ·But the
main thing which caused me to stumble was a certain conversation
in September when visiting the Walram firm, which produced hard
alloys and had certain connections. with Krupp. I had a very nasty
conversation with Berig during lunch. There were no counterrevolutionary statements maide either on his part or on mine. But,
seeing that I was in -complete agreement with the Five-Year Plan
and with everything that was being done in our country, J1e said:
"You say this because you are young, but I have lived
RUJSia
fifteen years, I know the state of mind and the situation ther-e very
well, and I tell you that if you had read Herr Trotsky, you would
speak differently." I must confess that after that I did read Trotsky's book Mein Leben. During one of his visits von Berg suddenly
asked me: "Have you read the book?" And I told him I had.
Vyshinsky: What book?
Stroilov: Mein Leben-My Life.
Vyshinsky: How did :he know tihat you were to read that book?
Stroilov: He recommended it to me. This is the booik l\fy Life,
the pe,Tiod starting from 1917.
Vyshinsky: Continue.
-· ___ . __ _
Stroilov: I s ai:d that I had rea.d it. He asked me whether I 'liked
it. I said from the literary point of view he, as a journalist, wrote
well, but because of the in.finite number of "I's" in it, I did not
like it.
On one of my visits to the Ruhr VaHey foe elder Dehlmann, his
son arid engineer Begemann of the Eichhof firm came to see me in

rn

1

248

my hotel. During the conversation- they said that we Russians in
general and I, Herr Stroilov in particular, did not in the least
appreciate the hospitality of the Germans, \vho let us go everywhere, study everything and so forth, and that we vepaid them with
black ingratitude, for the Russians were transferring their orders
to England and America. They demanded that I should do all I
could to popularize their goods in the technical press and at the
Trade Representation. I replied that this was not in my power. In
the end they resorted to plain threats. "We know," they said,
"that in the U.S.S.R. you have engaged a certain number of people
who are our representatives." I said I knew nothing about this.
They mentioned the names of oertain people. I agreed this was
true; I had engaged them. They said; "We know that you are carrying on Communist agitation." I said this was quite untrue.
They presented me with the following alternative: either they
would for.bid me to make any visits, or during the next visit I made
they would put me in prison. "Your Trade Representation may
intercede for you," they sai:d, "but they won't risk a conflict on
your account."
And then they a.gain began harping on !the theme that "after all,
we are a good firm; even if you dio recommenld us, there wi1!1 be
nothing sus:picious aibout it." And after that I giwe them help.
Vy.shinsky: All the same, these are insi:ufficient grounds for
becoming an forelligence service agent.
Stroilov: Of course they are insufficient. I became an intelligence service agent in 1931. And this conversation about which I
am now speaking took place towards the beginning of November
or the end of October 1930.
Vyshinskg: In 1930?
Stroilou: Yes.
Vyslzinsk17: So this was not the last stage?
Stroilov: No.
'Vyshinsky: Andi I was: speaking about the fast stage.
Stroilov: Shall I tell aibout the last stage?
l'yshinsky: Tell how you becmne an intelligence service agent.
Stroilov: Well, you see. . . .
Vyshinsky: What you have said paves the way for the answer
to this question, but i:t is not an ans;.,ver in itself.
Stroilov: At the end of November 1930 I came to Moscow to
attend a session of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee as an alternate member of the All-Rus-sian Central Ex·ecntive
Committee. I paid a visit to the collective farm where my parents
Jive. It seemed to me at that time that what was being done in regard to collectivfaation was on the wrong track. At any rate, regarding the tempo that was set. It seemed to me at that time that
24Q

both the t·L'mpo and scope of industrialization that were undertaken by us in the Soviet Union \Yere too great. I began to waver.
1 began to doubt.
Perhaps it a'1so se('med to me to be so because of the outward
pompousness which I saw in Ger.many. That is why the second
stimulus, besides the shadowing and provocation that went on in
Germany, was my journey to the U.S.S.R., where my convictions
were shaken.
I wiU not say that I had la.st faith in everything, but I wavered,
my foith was shaken and I Iost confidence in the rapid industrialization of the country. I began to doubt.
Vyshinsky: \Vas that after you had read Trotsiky's book?
Stroilov: Yes. But it is difficult to say what exercised most
influence.
Vyshinsky: All of it taken together.
Stroilov: Perhaps it was reading Trotsky's book, or it may have
been the conversations with the Germans.
Vyshinsky: Both the conversations with the Germans and Trotsky influenced you?
Stroilov: Yes. After attending the session, I returned to Germany.
Vyshinsky: Did you iell anybody that you had begun to waver
through Trotsky's fault and after your meeting with the Germans?
Stroilov: No.
Vyshinsky: And you were elected an ailtemate member of the
All-Russian Central Executive Committee?
Stroilov: Yes, I was already an aHernate member. .;.,,,
Vyshinsky: And you combined all this: member of the_ __b,.11Russian Central Executive Committee, and at the same time -conspired with the German agents, and read Trotsky? Did you combine all this?
Stroilov: Yes.
(
Vyshinsky: Did you return to Berlin?
Stroilov: Yes, I returned to Berlin.
Vgshimky: Did you have a desire to remain- in Germany, not
to retnrn to the U.S.S.R.?
Stroilou: At once?
Vyshinsky: I am not speaking in terms of hours. Did you or
did you not?
________ _
Stroilou: A desire did arise in ime to remain in Germany.
Vyshinsky: A desire arose to remain in Germany. Did you inform anybody about it?
Stroilou: Any Soviet citizen?
Vyshinsk!J: No matter who, anyqne.
Stroilou: I not only said so, I wrote a note.
250

Vyshinsky: 'Vhat sort of note, to whom?
Slroilov: I handed a written .statement to ,~/iister saying
that I had decided to give up the idea of returning to the Soviet
l:-nion and expressed the wish to remain in Germany, working
energetically together with them and carrying out their orders.
Vysbinskg: What is that called?
Stroilov: Betrayal . . . of my country.
Vyshinsky: Betrayal of your country. A Russian! A ,Soviet citizen! Into whose hands did this note fall-Wiister's?
The President: This is where you ought to have starte'dl; it would
have been simpler.
Vyshinsky: I don't know if it would have been simpler from
Stroilov's point of view; he has the main say in this matter. To
continue: what did Wiister do about this note of yours?
Stroilov: It then happened that some eight or ten days after
I handed him this note, I Peceived a telegram from Moscow
that I was to return to the U.S.S.R. vVithin two days I packed up
and left. I could not understand why I was being summoned to
Moscow, since I had been there not long before and had been able
to make all kinds of official reports, had done all I could. So it
seemed to me strange. . . .
Vyshinsky: Why were you summoned to Moscow?
Stroilov: On the other- hand I thought that perhaps it was
in connection with some other circumstances in Novosibirsk, but
when I arrived it turned out it was not so.
Vyshinsky: Briefly, what was the matter?
Stroilov: It seemed to me that after receiving this written
statement, the Germans utilized me and then cast me aside.
Vyshinsky: How do you mean--cast you aside? You were
summoned to Moscow?
Stroilov: Yes.
l'yshinsky: By whom?
Stroilov: Bv Shestov.
Vyshinsky: ·Perhaps this was done in agreement with- 'Viister?
Stroilov: That I don't know, it is possible.
Vyshinsky: But still, how did you become an inteliligence service agent?
Stroilov: When - this wr:itten statement was in \Viister's
hands-I will not report the whole conversation that took place,
It lasted about five hours.
-Vyshinsky: Of that later.
Stroilov: \Viister declared that I was now in their hands, and
if I did not fulfil the commissions and tasks they set me, I would
be handed over to the Sov<iet authorities, who would be presented
·wi.th this written statement of mine,
251

Vyshinsky: \Vhat did you decide?
Stroilov: I ha·d a three hours' conversation on this subject. But
I was afraid to fa 11. . . .
Vyshinsky: Into the prisoners' dock, in which you did get?
Stroilov: To get into the hands of the G.P.U., I feared the penalty.
Vyshinsky: And that is why . . . ?
Stroilov: That is why I agreed! to Wiister's proposals, that is
to say, become a traitor.
Vyshinsky: Such is the end. Sit down.
May I continue putting questions to Shestov?
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky: And so you, Shestov, approachedl Stroilov, already
knowing that he had been enrolled in the -German intelligence service?
Shestov: Yes, but I am not in agreement with some of the points
mentioned bv Stroilov.
Vyshinsky: Meaning what? Did you not take part in enrolling
him then?
Shestov: No. He stated that he received a telegram signed by me
to return to the Soviet Union. That is wrong. At that time I was
not yet a traitor to my country.
Vyshinsky: W1ho cart tell?
Shesto1J: I received a telegram from Novosibirsk telling me
that Stroilov must be recailled from Germany.
Vyshinsky: Excuse me. Do you remember who recalled Stroilov from Germany?
Shestov: Yes, I do.
~
Vyshinsky: Do you remember how this happened?
~---.
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Tell us about it.
Shestov: It happened as follows: a telegram was received from
Abramov, the chairman of the ·board, instructing us to recaU.
Stroilov from Germany. At that time arrests began among the en-•
gineers iin the Kuzbas. I knew aoout this, so I ca,me to the chief o.f
the Foreign Department in the Supreme Council of National
Economy and expressed my view that Abramov was probably recalling Stroilov for one of two reasons: either in order to fill a gap
and set him to do practical work, or on suspicion that he was implicated; accordingly he had to be recalled, and I askedlthe·chief,.
to sign a telegram to that effect.
Vyshinsku: So it was done with your participation?
Shestov: Yes, but the telegram was not signed by me.
Vyshinsky: The point is not who signed the telegram. This
means that StrMlov is right when he says that Shestov had a hand
in his recall.

252

Shestov: No, he is. not right. I remember quite well that when
Stroilov came b~ck, he t~ied to arrange to be sent to Germany
again.
Vyshinsky: What he was trying to arrange is another matter.
\Yhat I am talking abou:t is: that you were trying to get him back
from Germany.
Shestov: Correct.
Vyshinsky: What did your espionage work consist in?
Shestov: The espionage work was as follows: at-the end of
1932. . . .
Vyshinsky: Be brief iand bear in mind the President's ruling
with regard to certain state requirements and state institutions.
Shestov: At the end of 1932 I saw Stroilov in Novosibirsk, and
he told me mat a new and fairly large group of German specialists
who were to engage in di,versive activities had arrived.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, they had· come in the guise of specialists?
Shestov: Yes. At that time a large number of engineers were
invited to the Kuzlbas, and they also arrived.
Vyshinsky: Mention their names.
Shestov: The time to mention names has not come yet.
Vyshinsk~1: No, the time to- menLion names has come now.
Shestov: No, excuse me. A plan was drawn up for the Kuzbas. . . .
Vyshinsky: I ask you: were you in touch with any of the spies
and diversionists?
Shestov: In Prokopyevsk I was in toiu:ch with Schebesto, Floren and Kahn. In 1934 I was working as manager of another mine,
and there I got in touch wit:h Stein--<no, excuse me-it was Baumgartner, who was employed by him for this purpose.
Vyshinsky: Did you learn this from Stroilov?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And Scheibesito? Who p-ut you in fO'llch with him?
Shestov: Stroilov told me that engineer Schebesto had arrived.
Vyshinsky: And Floren?
Shestov: Floren formerly worked in Prokopyevsk and he came
to my offke as an interpreter. I learned about h~m through
Schebesto.
Vyshinsky: How did you.get in touch with Kahn?
Shestov: Schebesto told me that Kahn was taking part in his
work.
Vyshinsky: And Stein?
Shestov: I got in touch with Stein through Floren.
_ Vyshinsk/g: \And through whom did you get in touch with
Baumgartner?
253

Shestov: I heard about that man from Stroilov.
Vyshinsky: And so, in the last resort, Stroilov is the source.
Schebesto-Stroilov, Kahn-Stroilov, Baumgartner-Stroilov, and
so forth. Always StroHov?
Shestov: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: Permit me to put a question lo Stroilov. Accused
St:roilov, is this correct?
Stroilov: He has mixed up the names. Not Baumgartner, but
Somrneregger.
Vyshinsky: Yet another one, !hen. And the rest? Is he right
about Sohebes.to?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinskg: Is he right about Floren?
Stroilov: {Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: Is he right about Kahn?
Stroilov: There was a specialist of that name.
Vyshinsky: Did you mention their names?
Stroilov: I only mentioned Schebesto's name to him.
Vyshinsky: And Stein?
Stroilov: I mentioned Stein to him so that he should bear him
in mjnd, when I was at Anzherka.
Vyslzinsky: You mentioned him so that he should bear him in
mind-and was that all? Schebesto led to Stein, Floren led to
Kahn, Floren led to Schebesto. And what about Baumgartner?
Stroilov: I recollect there was some such talk.
Vyshinsky: There are so many of them that you have mixed
up all their name.s.
~
Shestov: I remember quite well that Stroilov spoke..a.b_out,
Baumgartner.
Vyshinsky (to Shestov): Did Stroilov speak to you about Baumgartner?
Shestov: I heard of him from Stroilov. In answer to my direet
question as to ho>v he maintained contact, he told me: through efigineer Baumgartner.
Vgshinsky (to Stroilov): \Vas there any such talk?
Stroilov: Talk about maintaining contact through.·.
Vyshinsky: \Vas there such a person as Baumgartner?
Stroilov: There was.
Vyshinsky: Did you have conversations with him-?- -- - Stroilov: In general I was dealing with Shestov, but as contact
man we had Baumgartner and others as well.
Vyshinsky: Including Sommeregger?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinskg: And did you talk to Shestov about BaumgM.-tner?
Stroilov: I did, but I did not say he was a contacf man.
254

l'yshinsky: As what then? Stroilov: As one . . . .
Vyshinsky: As one of many?
Stroilov: Yes, of many.
\'yshinsky: Agents?
Stroilov: Agents.
Vyshinsky (to Shestov): So you had a faidy numerous crowd?
Shestov: Schebesto asked me to give him a plan with the
kev structures marked on it, so that he cou'ld commence a campaign of diversive woiik. I gaive him this plan. He made use of it
for diversive work in the Prokopyevsk district. For example, he
made an attempt to blow up the shaft and the headframe at Pit
No. 5. He laid a charge of dynamite. A fuse was attached, and
it only remained to ignite this fuse.
But the explosion did not take place for the sole reason that
when the charge was being laid beneath the headframe and in
the shaft, someone came along. On the following night a worker
who was clearing away rubbish near the headframe discovered
the charge, and it was removed.
Vyshinsky: So it was removed? But Schebesto was not
removed?
Shestov: No.
_Vyshinsky: Why not?
Shestov: I did not give him away.
Vyshinsky: You did not give him away?
Shestov: No.
Vyshinsky: Proceed. \Vhat happened next?
_
Shestov: At my instructions and with the help of the technician Kahn, we stole dynamite from the storehous~ and made our
own secret dynamite dump.
Vyshinsky: The dynamite was stolen with your assistance?
Shestov: No, I had no hand in the matter. He discussed the
question of the place with me.
Vyshinsky: You pwvided a place to keep the stolen dynamite?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Y-0u took part in the stealing?
Shestov: Yes.
l'yshinsky: That means that you and he stole it to;gether?
Shestov: I knew abO'Ut it.
Vyshinsky: No, excuse me, not knew, but helped?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You were his accomplice?
Shestov: Yes.
I'
Vyshinsky: T.hat means you were stealing together?
Shestov: Yes, together.
255

Vyshinsky: That is what I said.
Shestou: In 1934 this diurnp blew up. Some miners' children
were playing not far from the spot, and they probably started digging and struck tlus dynamite. ~he result was a dreadful explosion.
Vyshinsky: And what happened to the children?
Shestou: They were killed.
Vyshinsky: Many of ihem?
Shestov: Several. That was the end of Schebesto's doings in
Prokopyevsk.
Vyshinsky: And for what purpose was the dynamite stolen?
You have not told us that. For causing similar explosions?
Shestav: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: In order to prepare for blowing up the mines?
Shestou: Quite right. In May 1933 there was an attempt on
the part of Schebesto to set fire to the Kuznetsk power station
at the instructions of the German intelligence service and at my
instructions.
Vyshinsky: Who gave instructions to blow up this power
station?
Shestov: The instructions were mine.
Vyshinsky: You spoke to Schebesto about this?
Shestov: No. He simply told me he was taking steps to set fire
to the place. I knew of this fact.
Vyshinskg: What form did the attempt to set fire to the station take?
Shestov: I knew quite well from Schebesto that Jhe station
had been set on fire.
.
"":Vyshinsky: So it was not an attempt but an act of incenCliarism?
Shestov: Yes, actual incendiarism. Further, I know from
Floren that in the autumn of 1934 he set fire to the bunkers of
Pit No. 9.
I
Vyshinsky: But there was an attempt?
Shestou: Yes. Similarly there was an attempt to setfire to the
coal dumps at Pit No. 5-7.
Vyshinsky: When?
Slzestou: In the autumn of 1934. And only due to the fact that
the manager of the pit, who was not a member of the .Tr-0t.skyite
organization, quickly appeared on the scene, and because the firebrigade arrived in quick time, the fire was localized.
Vyshinskf/: Did you talk to Stroilov about these activities of
Schebesto, Floren and others?
Shestov: Yres, I did.
Vyshinsky: So he was also· informed a.bout the matter?
256

Shestov: Yes, he was.
Vyshinsky: Accused Stroilov, did you hear this last part of
Shestov's testimony?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Do you confirm that you were informed about the
diYersh·e work of Schebesto, Floren and others?
Stroilov: Yes, I confirm it.
Vyshinsky: Did you happen lo talk to Shestov about this?
Stroilov: Several times.
Vyslzinsky: In what connection did these conversations of
yours take place? Did he inform you or you him?
. Stroilov: \Ve kept each other informed, since the plans for
wrecking work were drawn up jointly with him.
·
·
Vyshinsky: So you had talks in order to check up on the fulfilment of the plans?
Slroilov: In order to keep each other informed about the work
that had been done.
Vyshinsky: About the crimes thathad been jointly committed?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Sit down please. (To Shestov.) Proceed.
Shestov: I cannot now recaill any other facts. Stroilov told me
about the Lenin Mines, but there, as far as I recall, disruptive
activities were not being conducted by the German spies; disruptive work there was done by Andreyev, the chief mechanic of
this mine, and he made an attempt to set fire lo the Yemelyanov
Pit.
Vyshinskg: But what about your activities? Your wrecking
"·ork in the installation of the mine machinery and so forth?
Shestov: I am just coming to that. This is a very large chapter.
In the Prokopyevsk Mines the chamber-and-pillar ·system was
employed without filling in the worked-out cavity. As a result of
this system we had over 50 per cent loss of coal instead of 'the
usual 15-20 per cent. Secondly, as a result of this, \ve had about
sixty underground fires in·rthe Prokopyevsk Mines up to the end
of 1935.
Vyshinsky: This as a result . . . .
Shestov: Of the work of wrecking and destruction that was
done.
Vyshinsky: Did you organize these underground fires?
Shestov: We did not organize them, but we introduced a system
of coal extraction which caused underground fires.
Vyshinsky: Caused them?
Slzestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I mean "organized" m this sense, that you put
257

into effect such a system as must inevitably result in the outbreak of fires.
Shestov: Quite correct.
Vyshinsky: And it was for this purpose that you employed
this system?
Shestov: Solely for this purpose.
Vyshinsky: In order to cause fires?
Shestov: Yes, in order to cause big losses of coal.
Vyshinsky: Who aided you in this criminal work?
Shestov: I was aided by Stroilov, by the manager of the Prokopyevsk Mines, Ovsyannikov, and by the chief engineer of
these mines, Mayer. With their assistance the deepening of the
shafts was begun at the wrong time, in particular at the Molotov
Pit; the hundred-metre level of the "Koksovaya" Pit 'was deliberately left unworked from 1933 onwards, and the deepening of the
"Meneikha" Pit and Pit No. 5-6 was not begun at the right time.
It was held up for as long as two years. Further, in the Prokopyevsk Mines two large shafts, Nos. 7-8, were sunk at my personal
instructions on a coal bed which, as I knew previously, would
present great difficulties for the working of these pits. AU this
was done deliberately.
At the "Koksovaya',. Plt and at Pit No. 5-6, in the installation
of the equipment and in the installation of the underground power
station and of other machinery, disruptive work was performed on a large scale. This was done by engineer Schneider,
who had been recruited by me, together \vith a group of his assistants.
~
Vyshinsky: Is that all?
~-Shestov: In Anzherka, the starting of Pit No. 5 was delayed
for two years. Similar extensive wrecking operations were carried
on in Pit No. 9-15.
Besides this, measures of a wrecking and destructive character
were carried out on a large scale on the machinery already in use,
both at the Lenin Mines 13.Ild at the Anzhero-Sujensk Mines, as a
result of which these mines did not fulfil fueir plans for five years
running.
And finally, at all the mines-the Prokopyevsk, the Anzherka
and the Lenin Mines-the Stakhanov movement was sabotaged._
Instructions were issued to worry the life out of the workers.
Before a worker reached his place of work, he must be made to
heap two hundred curses on the heads of the pit management.
Impossible conditions of work were created. Normal work was
rendered impossible, not only for Stakhanov methods but even
!or ordinary methods.
258

\:yshinsky: You have already spoken about your terrorist
activity.
The President: It is nearly ten o'clock.
Vyshinsky: Two more questions. In the first place, in addition
to the crimes about which you have just spoken, do you not have
on your record what I might simply call crimes of banditry in
the direct sense of this word? For example, robberies and
murders?
Shestov: Murders, yes.
Vyshinsky: Not terrorism, but plain murder?
Shestov: I recollect that at Prokopyevsk engineer Boyarshinov
was murdered by the terrorist group.
Vyshinskg: Why was he murdered?
.
Shestov: He was murdered on my ins'tructions. He had reported
to me that there was something wrong in the work of the
Coal :\fine Construction Trust. He called my attention to this.
At that time I enjoyed the confidence of the engineers and technicians. Boyarshinov himself was a former wrecker of the Donb.as,
but he was working honeslly in these mines.
Vyshinsky: He applied to you as an authoritative person in
charge?
Shestov: Yes. He wanted to open my eyes to the state of things.
I told him I would take note of what he said, thanked him, and
added: "I will inform the right people. Don't say anything for
the present." And then I summoned Cherepukhin and gave him
iru;tructions to murder him, and this was done.
Vyshinsky: So he was murdered?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinskg: An honest engineer?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And who murdered him?
Shestov: As I was away Clherepukhrin did not ten me who did it.
Vyshinsky: You acted through Cherepukhin?
Shestov: Yes. Cherepukhin reported to me.
ryshinsky: Tell us, was Arnold a member of Cherepukhin's
group?
Shestov: He was.
Vyshinskg: And this group was inten!dedi for terrorism and
for murders such as this?
Shestov: Yes.
Yyshinskg: \Vho was the actual murderer?
Shestov: I cannot give his name. This was in 1933. I did not
know all the Trotskyites dn Prokopyevsk.
Vyshinsky: In short, you were the organizer of the murder'!
259

Shestov: Quite true.
Vysliinsky: Through the group which acted under your direction?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Now for the second question. \Vhat about rob.beries?
Shestov: The Anzherka bank was robbed with my participation, at my instrudions.
Vyshinsky: How did this happen?
Shestov: It was in 1934. I had won over Figurin, the manager
of the Anzhero-Sujensk district branch of the St.ate Bank; he
enlisted the head cashier Solomin into the organization, and they
took 164,000 rubles from the bank for the use of our organization
and handed over this money to me.
Vyshinsky: And what did you do?
Sliestov: I distributed it as follows: part of the money, about
30,000 rubles, I set aside for the Anzherka organization, for the
terrorist group which was there-the group of Schumacher and
Fedotov-and for other purposes. 40,000 rubles I handed over
to Muralov for the other organizations under his personal charge,
and he asked me for another 30,000 for Kemerovo. l\Iuralov
received 70,000. The rest of the money I handed over to the
Prokopyevsk organization. I gave Cherepukhin about 15,000 and
Ovsyannikov about 30,000.
Vyshinsky: Did anyone keep check of the expenditures?
Shestov: I trusted our men.
Vyshinsky: All the more so since the money belonged to the
state. I have no more questions.
The President: The Court is adjourned till 11 o'clock tomorrow
morning.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
{
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Coizrt of the U.S.S.R.

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

260

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, JANUARY 26, 1937, 11.00 A.:M.

Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: The session is resumed.
Ka=nacheyev: May I put a few questions to the accused Shestov?
The President: You may.
Kaznacheyev: Accused Shestov, when testifying yesterday, you
related how you enlisted Stroilov. Tell us, when you enlisted Arnold did you use the same methods, or other methods?
Shestov: With regard to Arno1d I employed another method of
enlistment.
·
Kaznacheyev: Namely?
Shestov: In the summer of 1932 Arnold came to see me at the
Coal Mine Construction Trust to seek employment as a mechanic
at one of the mines. When examining his application form I noted
that he ha:d not concealed the fact from me that he had been dismissed from the Kuznetsk Metallurgical \Vorks Construction Trust
for anti-Soviet propaganda among the foreign specialists. This
induced me to employ him and lhen to work to enlist him in our
Trotskyite organization. I thought then of using him for undermining activities. From my subsequent acquaintance with him in the
summer and autumn of 1936 I learned that Arnold was, as far as
I can remember, by nationality a Finn, that his name was Kelken
or Kilgan, or something like that-Arnold will tell you-but at
any rate he had a Finnish name. In tsarist days he -lived under the
name of Vasilyev. . . .
. Vyshinsky: I do not quite understand why Sheistov should relate
Arnold's biography.
The President: And the question was not about that; the question was how Shcstov enlisted Arnold.
llyshinsky: Let him describe the method of enlistment, but I object to Shestov relailing the biography of Arnold, who is sitting here
in the dock, before the accused Arnold relates it himself. That is
not right.
The President: What question did the Comrade Counsel for
Defence ask you? He asked you what methods you employed to
enlist the accused Arnold in yot:fr' group. He did not ask· you to
relate his biography. Answer the question as put.
261

Shestozi: I have already said that when Arnold began to work
in the Coal Mines Construction Trust he already had firm convictions as an anti-Soviet element.
Kaznacheyev: That is, you got to know that he was an antiSoviet element and proceeded to enlist him? Did you know it, or
not?
Slzestov: No, I negotiated with him over the course of several
months.
Kaznacheyev: Over the course of several months? How many?
Shestov: Five or six months.
Kaznacheyev: And during this period you were breaking him in?
Shestov: Yes, I was breaking him in. I told him that I was a
Trotskyite, a member of a Trotskyite organization, and persuaded
him to :take the path of terrorism. He agreed. And later I asked him
whether he would undertake to commit a terrorist act. After some
time and further discussions, he consented to this.
Kazn<i.cheyev: Did you have to threaten him w·ith anything
when recruiting him, as you did with Stroilov?
Shestov: No, Stroilov 'was different, but how could I threaten
Arnold when I knew very well that I needed a man who would undertake to commit a terrorist act?
Kaznacheyev: When you talked to Stroilov, did you not'
threaten to denounce him to the authorities?
Shestov: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: Did you have to resort to similar threats in the
case of Arnold, or not?
Shestov: No.
~
Kaznacheyev: But you said you knew about his anti-SoViet s.e.:utiments. Knowing about them, did you not take advantage of them~
Shestov: I did. It gave me a reason for enlisting him for the
execution of terrorist acts. I put him in touch with Cherepukhin.
Kaznacheyev: You raised that quesiion, but there were no
threats?
Sllestov: No.
Kaznacheyev: Now tell me, when did you first instruct him ft)
commit a terrori.st act?
Shestov: I myself did not give the instructions.
Kaznaclieyev: You did not give them personally?
Shestov: No, I put him in touch with the man who-was -in
practical charge of terrorist acts.
Kaznacheyev: vVhat is the name of that man?
Shestov: Cherepukhin.
Kaznacheyev: Consequently, it was Cherepukhin "\Vho gave the
direct instructions?
Shestov: Yes.
262

Ka=naclzeyev: Did not Cb.erepukhin report to you what Arnold
said?
·
Shestov: He said that Arnold had nett only agreed to commit a
terrorist act but wa·s al.so prepared to die in the attempt.
Ka=nacheyev: Did the first commission given by Cherepukhin
lo _\mold refer to a terrorist act, and against whom?
Shestov: Against Orjonikidze, but it did not come off, because
Orjonikidze did not use the car_
Kaznrlchegev: That is, for an absolutely unforeseen reason?
Shestov: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: What was the second commission?
Shestov: To commit a terrorist act agn.inst Molotov.
Kaznacheyev: Did Oherepukhin later report to you about this
terrorist act?
Shestov: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: How did Arnold explain his failure to carry it out?
Shestov: Cherepukhin said that Arnold funked it.
Kaznacheyev: And dlid you see Arnold after that?
Shestov: Yes, I did.
Kaznacheyev: At once, or after SOIIIle time?
Shestov: Not at once. It was some time later, when he came to
work at the Anzhero-Sujensk Mine at the end of 1934.
Kaznacheyev: At that tirpe, during this meeting with Arnold,
did vou talk about the unsuccessful terrorist act?
Shestov: A.s far as I recall, we did.
Kaznacheyev: What did Arnold tell you: that he had failed to
commit the terrorist act, or that he became scared?
Shestov: He explained that he had failed.
Kaznacheyev: And you suspected that he became scared?
Slzestov: Yf's.
Kaznacheyev: From what Oherepukhin ha:d reported to you?
Shestov: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: \Vas this the last commission Arnold received
from you or through Cherepukhin?
Shestov: I do not quite understand. I oommi..sisdoned Arnold
through Cherepukhin to commit a terrorist act aig-ainst Molotov.
Kaznacheyev: Apart from this corrumission, did Arnold receive
other commissions?
Shestov: No.
Kaznacheyev: Did you commission him to recruit anybody else
for the organization or not?
Shestov: No. The whole work of recruiting terrorists in
Prokopyevsk district, after I had recruited Cherepukhin for this work,
was conducted entirely by Cherepukhin.
Kaznacheyev: And by nobody else?

the

263

Shestov: \Vith the exception of Arnold, with whom I had dealings and recruited.
Kaznadieyev: And no instructions at all were given to Arnold
lo recruit anybody?
Shestov: Possibly, but I do not remember. . . .
Kaznachegev: That is all I have to ask at present.
The President: We shall now proceed to examine the accusoo
Stroilov.AccusedStroilov,dlo you confirm the testimony you gave at
the preliminary investigation and at the proceedings of the Visiting
Session of the Military Collegiurn of the Supreme Court in November?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Can you add anything to the testimony you gave
yesterday?
Stroilov: I was sent for two years to Germany and was U1ere
employed as chief engineer of the mining section of the Technical
Bureau of the Tr:otde Representation. In thfa capacity I visited many
factories, engineering \VOrks, mines, show rooms, and so forth.
Consequently, a fairly large number of people knew me. Moreover,
for s·ix months I was in <:barge of engaiging specialists for thi>
U.S.S.R. My work consisted of testing their technica'l knawledge
and of assigning them on the basis of this testing to the various
jobs in the U.S.S.R. Thus, about 250 men passed through my hands,
but only 70 were engaged. From these two circumstances one must
conclude that some representatives of factories and representatives of engineers' societies in the Ruhr basin, in Silesia and Saxony
knew me.
=-=
In add!ition, although this did not come within the -fun~t:Wns
of our Tc:>chnical Bureau, which rendered technical assistance to
the Soviet Union and \vhich at that time was the base for raising
qualifications, we were approached by the Imports Department of
our Trade Representation for technical consultation on machiner~
that was ordered in Germany.
·
I gave a number of consultations, and in this way a number of
firms, I will not enumerate them as they were many, got to know
me. I say this because it is .evi<lent that as a result of my visits
to these enterprises I became known as an engineer.
The thing started gra<lua11y with my meeting von Berg, to
whom I referred in passing yesterday. It is hard to say·-wha't: par.._
ticular firm von Berg represented, but he said that he knew everything in Germany. He spoke Russian excellently because he had
lived in Russia, in St. Petersburg, 15 or 20 years before the revolution. This man visited the Technical Bureau several times and had
talks \vith me on business matters, in particular about hard alloys
manufactured by the firm of W alram.
264:

Yestel'day I mentioned that in visiting laboratori~s and works
to 5e€ the manufacture of these alloys and their use in mines, where
they produce good results, I had a conversation with Berg ·about
our construction work. Berg, who had doubts about our -construction and about everything else, 1advised me to read Trotsky;s book,
as I have already said. Evidently, Berg, too, was· known, for
when I visited firms and reference was made.to the fact that I had
already done something, mention was also made of my far from
pro-SoYiet sentiments, for I had! already read Trotsky's My Life.
From this I drew the conclusion that Berg was an informer for
a number of o<ther bodias.
I had a talk with Berg about our construction work. Berg advised me to read Trotsky's book, of which I spoke yesterday.
\Vben I was in the Soviet Union at the endi of November or ·the
beginning of December in 1930, this Berg was also in Moscow. He
urged me over the telephone to come and see him. I did not go. He
then asked me to send him a postcard saying when I would return
to Germany, which I did. On my return to Germany I saw Berg
several times. During one of our conversations he said that in the
Soviet Union it was known that I had given ce:rlain assistance to
the firms of \Valram and Eichhof. At another meeting he added
that apparently I was being watchedJ and that my anti-Soviet utterances were known in the Soviet Union and I must therefore remain in Germany.
At the end of March 1931 I got in touch with Wiister, whom
von Berg had recommended, as a man who could arrange a trip
for me to Czechoslovakia and France to clear up certain questions
regarding the working of thick coal seams. \Viister told me that
"it could be arranged, but since you are not a German, there must
be some written statem'ent to the effect' that you are our man :and
will not let me down.'' And I gave him the docu1I11ent about which
I have already spoken, that is, my consent not to return to the
Soviet Union and to remain and work in Germany with them and
. to carry out their instructiono. About three or four days later, this
was on April 2, I went to see him on Arrnstrasse, I think it was No.
59, second floor. Wiister said to me: "There can be no question
either of your remaining in Germany or of your .going to France
and Czechoslovakia." I must confess I was rather taken ab&ek and
said that this was simply dishonest. He answered, "There is nothing
dishonest about it. You gave us your personal note, Herr Stroilov,
and you must carry out our instructions as you bound yourself to
do." He declared in a loud voice that he was now speaking not
in his own name, but in the name of those political circles who
could do one of two thrings: either, on the basis of a number of
facts regarding propaganda I was alleged to have carried on, to put
265

me in a German prison, or on the basis of this note, to put
me in a Soviet prison. I consented to carry out Wilster's instructions, that is, to put it plainly, to become a traitor. During this
same conversation he told me that my immediate task was to help
German specialists, and especially those who came to me with
the password, "Greetings from Wilster"; I was to help in every
way to place them in definite jobs in the U.S.S.R., •to help them .in
their work and not to pay any attention t(} technica!l shortcoming~.
He also told me that I must take measures to hinder the development of the coal industry of the Soviet Union. In plain words,
lhis was an instruction to carry on wrecking work.
On April 11 a telegram was received recalling me to the U.S.S.R.
In Novosibirsk I was first appointed deputy-chief of the Rationalization and Research Work Department and in 1932 chief of this
department. About two months later some of the German specialists began to cmne to me with the agreed password. Until the end
of 1934 siix men came to see me: Sommeregger, Wurm, Baumgartner, Maas, Hauer and Flessa. These intelligence service agents, !lS
I found afterwards, were placed in the most important key positions. In August one of them started a conversation with me about
a certain official person. . . .
At the beginning of ·1931 he told me that this official person)
knew me. And about a month and a half later, approximately in
April, 1931, I was told that this offioial person sent his greetfogs
and requested me not to forget the obligations I had undertaken.
I was thus caught in a second noose. The instructions I received
from this official person differed very little from Wiist@"'s instructions. They were a sort of reminder.
I sent Wiister three reports. In reply I received insfruction-s,
Vyshinsky: What instructions did you receive?
Stroilov: Counter-revolutionary instructions, directives to commit acts of destruction.
My first report, made in January 1932 through engineer Flessa,
and telling of the va:st plan of development in the Kuznetsik Basin,
was in effect espionage. Flessa returned in August and said that
Wilster demanded that I should proceed to form an organization
of counter-revolutionary minded specialists. In 1933 I conveyed
to \Viister through Sommeregger that I had started to form the
organization.
In 1934, approximately in June, I reported through Sommeregger, who was going abroad on vacation, how many specialists, Soviet citizens, I had drawn into the counter-revolutionary
organization and in what mines, and informed him that the
method by 'vhich mines were being put into operation and run
was assuming a wrecking character. To this I received the reply
266

that I should proceed to decisive wrecking and destructive acts.
As for diversive acts, Sommeregger himself should have reported about that because he knew not less, but more than I about
the matter. Moreover, I pointed out (it is true it was no·t as striking
then as it was _in 1935) that in several of the mines, for example
in the Prokopyevsk Mine, a number of fires were caused as a
result of the natural subsidence method employed, and these fires
were endangering the output of coking coa1l for the fron and steel
industry in the East. To this he replied that the directives which
I had received!- as far back as 1933-which I faiigot to menlionto proceed to determined wrecking operations and acts of destruction-had not been carried out. He ca'lled this armchair wrecking
and said that it was necessary to accelerate the work; he a1.so said
that I was not !being honest in the matter, I was not carrying out
my promises, that they were simply losing time, they< cO'llld be
using India or China (they counted on us for equipment) and
you, they said, :are conducting trade negotiations with America.
He was particularly angry about the fact that we had failed
to carry out the diversive acts mentioned by Shestov and aibout
which I will speak. Moreover, Scxmmeregiger (perhaps this is a
detail) spoke not in the name of Wiister when he gave instructions,
but always said, "we."
The last report I made, approximately in September 1935,
·pointed out that mining operations in the principal pit in Prokopyevsk were in a very bad way, undergrCl'Uil.d fires were very common, that this was restricting output, and that a number of mines
were not beiillg used to full output capacity.
As for specialists, a number of whom had been discharged by
that time, I said I coul1d do nothing because some of the spedalists
had behaved in too blatant and insolent a manner. I receh·ed no
iustructions in reply to this report. \.Vii.ster was not in Berlin, he
was away. He said that he had passed 'the matter to a reliable
person; but I did not hear any more either in the way of information or instructions.
A..s to the official person, all his instructions mainly concerned
the placing of people. In particular,.on the demand of this official
person, engineer Stickling was sent to Kemerovo and was recommended by me for the purpose of maintaining connection with the
counter-revolutionary organization.
I was warned not to th!i.nk of starting anything in the na.ture
of a revolt against the carrying out of purely provocative measures.
The President: By whom?
Stroilov: By the official person.
The President: In Novosibirsk he did not speak about the actions of this official person.
267

Vyshinsky {to the President): In the present instance we have
a statement bv the accused Stroilov about the actions of a certain
official persoi{. I consider that for the reasons you have mentioned
this person need not be named, but it ·is essential that he should
state what the actions of this official person were. The warning
you made previously, it seems to me, works as far as the accused
Strnilov is concerned.
Tlie President: Accused Stroilov is raising this question in open
court.
Vyshinsky: Without naming the person in question.
The President (to Stroolov): Do you desire to repeat the testimony you gave in Novosibirsk during the proceedings at the Visiting Session, or do you wish to say something else?
Vyshinsky (lo the President): Pardlon me, but the procedure
Jays down S}){'cific rules and to ask the accused what he wants
to say is to hamper the accused.
The President: That is absolutely not so.
Vyshinsky: I request to have it entered in the record, as a ci.rcumstance hampering lhe accused.
The President: Accused Stroilov, do you wish to speak of the
actioilJS of the official person you named during the proceedings
at the Visitinig Session iri Novosibirsk?
Stroilov: Yes, of lhe official person.
The President: Bear in mind that in open court you must not
mention the names of official persons of foreign state institutions.
Stroilov: Very wdl. On the demand of this officia'l person,
efforts were made to incense Soviet and foreign worke~ against
the Soviet government.
~-I can quote the fellowing examples. In in:viiling foreign workert>
the object of the Soviet Union was to adopt such methods of work
as to enable the Soviet workers working side by side with them
to learn ·how to improve the organization of production and use
advanced methods of labour. Therefore the most rational method
would have been to put the foreign workers 'with the Soviet workers so that our Soviet workers could learn t6 become skilled
workers. It was deliberately l!rranged to carry on agitation with a
view to preventing this. The foreign workers not only worked
separately, but enjoyed far better conditions: tools, compressed air,
electric power, overalls, etc. After this workers said: this i-s.foe. w~.y_
the Soviet workers are treated. If you 'want to work properly you
must have the same conditions that we have. In other words this
was simply inciting the Soviet workers against the Soviet government. Of course, the Soviet workers said that it was easv to work
well under the conditions the foreign workers enjoyed "in regard
to pay, overalls and the rest. It looks, they said, as if we were
268

merely floor sweepers and not like those who were invited from
:.broad. There were brigades like this all over the place, particularly in Pit 5-6 and Pit 5-7 in the Anzhero-Sujensk mine, where
these workers were concentrated.
In the second place our Party and Soviet organizations could
not let the foreign workers remain outside of flhe gentral workers'
public life in the mines . .Also they saw that ·a numlber of foreign
\vorkers were in many cases not disinclined1 to work in the Soviet
Unioo as Soviet citizens. I know that fierce agitation, a:lmost unconcealed, \vas carried on with islogans about Germany's rebirth
and so forth, in short, with fascist slogans about the workers who
remained in the Soviet Union remaining in slavery, and so forth.
I will not go into details concerning this malicious agitation but it
was carried on, and I know this from information received from.
official personis. .
Third, endless disputes were deliberately provoked. We have
our own disputes, they are inevitrrble: about piece rarf:es, overalls,
conditions of labour and so forth. But this was mere fault-finding.
and there were disputes during which some foreign workers stopped
"Ork for 5, 10, 15 and 20 ·days. The rumour was spread, nobody
knows by whom, that these people, saboteurs and undisciplined,
were taken back and the Soviet workers used to say: the law is
applied to some but not to others: if we miss work for a day or two
we are discharged.
Then there is the point about the demand to submit some of
our inventions. These are the points I asked the Court to permit
me to communicate.
This then was the criminal line I pursued in my connections
with the foreigners.
·
Now I ask permission to speak about connections with the
Trotskvites.
l'yshinsJ.:y: \Vait a moment, you said that \vhcn von Berg was
in Moscow he rang you up, and you do not even know why?
Stroilov: He rang me up on the telephone.
Vyshinsky: And you say that you did not know why he rang
you up?
. Stroilov: I did not. Perhaps simply to show that we were on
familiar terms. I cannot to this day explain why he i:ang me up.
Vyshinsky: And <lid you ring him up?

Stroilov: ::\o.
Vyslzinsky: And did you not intend to ring him up?
Stroilov: I sent him a postcard.
Vyshinsky: ·what did you send him a postcard about?
Stroilov: I wrote: Hermann Vasilyevich, I thank you for greet269

ing me in my home country. I shall be returning to Germany in
about two weeks. ·
Vyshinsky: He greets you and you greet him. What then do
you not understand when he greets you?
Stroilov: I do not understand why he rang up. He did not
give me any ·commissions.
Vysllinsky: I suppose he had a reason.
Stroilov: He is an old hand, he would not ihave rung up for
nothing.
Vyshinsky: And you would not have written for nothing?
Stro.ilov: When I wrote him the postcard I had nothing bad
in mind.
Vyshinsky: Only good?
Stroilov: There was nothing good in the connections with von
Berg.
Vyshinsky: That is what I say, and yet you say that you had
nothing bad in mind. And so you had no intention of writing and
phoning, apart from the posteard. Did you have his telephoµe
number?
Stroilov: He told me it.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen?
Stroilov: Why, when he spoke on the telephone.
Vyshinsky: And did you write it down?
Stro'ilov: I cannot recall now; it is in my noteibook.
Vyshinsky: Don't be in a hurry, we shall come to )'(>Ur notebook.
Stroilov: I wrote it -down.
..
Vyshinsl.:y: Why did you write it down if you had n<Yint~R_tion of ringing up?
..
Stroilov: He said if you ·want to ring up-write it down.
Vyshinsky: \Vhy do people write down telephone numbers?
Stroilov: In order to ring up.
Vyshinsky: And did you write it down in order to ring up?
Stroilov: I did not ring him up.
Vyshinsky: I do not know whether you rang up or not, ibut
you aidmit that you wrote down Berg"s telephone number? Alfow
me to hand the accused a book to look at. On page 317-319-the
numeration is rather strange--we have: von Berg, 8-50, ext. 223.
Is that right?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Do you know wl}ere von Berg was staying?
Stroilov: Either at the Grand Hotel or the Savoy.
Vyshinskg: What month was that?
Stroilov: At the end of November or the be.ginning of December.
270.

Vyshinsky: What year?
Stro"ilov: 1930.
Vyshinsky: I request the Court to have attached to the records
a statement by the Savoy Hotel: "Foreign tourist H. V. Berg, born
1874, German subject, merchant by profession, Hotel Savoy,
Room 223 (it is identical with tihe telephone number), December
1-15, 1930, arrived from Berlin." How long di<l he stay?
Stroilov: I think not less than a month, or about a month.
Vyshinsky: Where did he g_o to after that?
Stroilov: Back to Germany.
Vyshinsky; Did you know when :he left?
Stroilov: I did not know at the time, but later.
Vyshinsky: Did you know when he left?
Stroilov: No.
Vyshinsky: Then why do you say he was here for a month?
Stroilov: Because when he returned he saiid he . was here for
a month.
.·
Vyshinsky: Perhaps it was for a fortnight?
Stroilov: Pei:ihaps, I do not know exactly.
Vyshinsky: The statement says that he arrived on December 1
and left on December 15. Is i1hat poss;ible?
Stroilov: It is.
Vyshinsky: "In the room occupied by Berg there was a telephone, No. 8-50, ext. 223. Director of the hotel. Seal and reference
number." Is that all correct?
Stroilov: It .is.
Vyshinsky: So Berg is a real live person, not a myth?
Stroilov: No. The others I mentioned are also real live people.
(At the request of the State Prosecutor, accused Stroilov's notebook containing von Berg's telephone number when the latter visited ihe Soviet Union is han•ded to Stroilov.
Stroilov certifies that the book belongs to him, Stroilov, an<l that
he himself had made the entry in question in the book.)
Vyshinsky: Very well. Now as to Wiister. Is this little book
yours? Hand it to him, please. (Stroifov is handed a book in
a dark red binding.)
Stroilov: Yes, this book is mine.
Vyshinsky: And is what is written in the book in )'Our handwriting?
·
Stroilov (reads from the book): "Wiister, Armstrasse.
Vyshinsky: Is that Wiister's home address?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Why have you Wiister's home address.?
Stroilov: Because he said, when he was. . . .
Vyshinsky: Did you ~isit him at this address?
271

Stroilov: I have already testified that I visited him at his home
on April 2.
Vyshinsky: You visited him once?
Stro"ilov: Once.
Vyshinsky: \Vas it after you wrote down his address or before?
Stroilou: After. He to1d it to me 'in Berlin and I went to this
a.d:d:ress.
Vyshinsky: He. told it to you 'in Berlin and you wrote it down
then?
Stroi(ou: Yes.
Vyshinsky: For what purpose, why did you visit him at his
home? Where were you supposed to meet him on business?
Stroilou: On lmsiness, on neutral territory.
Vyshinsky: What does that mean, neutral territory?
Stroilou: Let us say, in the lobby of a hotel.
Vyshinsky: \-Vas it necessary for you, a Soviet engineer sent
abroad on official business, to visit the private homes of foreign
citizens and to enter into intimate relations with them?
Stroilou: No.
Vyshinsky: Yet you visited Ber.g's home?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I request the Court to have attached to the record.
this address and teilephone number taken from this official publication (hands to the Court a big book in a Ted binding). On page
206, against No. 8563 there is \Viister, Armstrasse, and the address of this \Viister, which is mentioned also in Stroilov's noteboak.
"""
Do you confirm this, Stroilov?
Stroilou: Yes, I do.
Vyshinsky: An official publication.
The President: Of >vhat year?
Vyshinsky: It is mentioned there.
Next, please hand to the accused Stroilov this black book. (Stroilov is handed a book of an office journal type in a black binding.)
What is that black book?
Stro'ilou: It is my diary.
Vyshinsky: Where did you keep it?
Stroilou: I kept it while I was abroad.
Vyshinsky: In what year?
Stroilov: All the time I lived there.
Vyshinsky: Is it in your handwriting?
Stroilou: Everything here. . . . ·
Vyshinsky: Please look first, do not take it for granted.
Stroilou: Everything here is mine.
Vyshinsky: Yours?
272

Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And is the meeting with Wiister and Berg recorded
in your handwriting?
.
Stroilov: All this was written when l was in Germany, and
when I returned to the Soviet Union I continued it probably for
about two months. That was already here in the Soviet Union.
Vyshinsky: When did all this happen?
Stroilov:· In 1930-31.
Vyshinsky.: And it was then that you wrote it?
Stroilov: Immediately.
Vyshimky: Very well. Let me have t!hat book back again:
This book has been attached to the files as material evid'ence.
I request the Court to look at page 23, which contains a reference
to the meeting with Berg; page 27, which contains a reference to a
conversation with Berg; page 37, which contains a reference to a
letter from Wiister; page 33, which also contains a reference to
\Viister; page 35, which contains a reference to Wiister; page 43,
which contains a reference to Sommeregger. The charact.cr of
these meetings and conversations was explained to. you by the
accused StroHov yesterday. I want to draw your attention to the
fact that these meetings are confirmed in the diary of 1931.
Stroilov: Of 1930 and 1931.
Vys.hinsky: Now let us turn to your wrecking and diversive
activities.
Stroilov: Wei.th the Germans?
Vyshinsky: You couldn't do without the Germans, then?
Stroilov: No, you see, ~here wer•e Germans, Trotskyites.
Vyshinsky: And 3.11 the rest?
Stroilov: No, not all the rest, but those specialists.
V.yshinsky: I want to know ahout the criminal activities, and
of course when you speak about any particular crime, you should
say where it was committed, when it was committed, by whom
it was committed, and why antd wherefore. Please elucidate these
points. Take at least the principal, most important details. If
you begin to enumerate everything, it seems to me that even ·two
sittings will not be enough.
Stroilov: Shestov alreaidy spoke a!bout that yesterday, and he
could not avoid telling about. it, because the plan of wrecking and
destructive work was drawn up together with him as the representative of the \.Vest-Siberian Trotskyite organization.
What was the nature of this work?
.
First of all about diversive measures, about acts of diversion,
although I must say that itis hard to distinguish certain wrecking
measures from diversive measures. I confirm that there was an attempt and preparations to blow up the headframe of pfr 5-6.
273

This was to be done by the foreign specialist Schebesto. I received
notice about Schebesto's coming in 1932 from Sommeregger, who
said that Schebesto had to be put in touch with Shestov. I wondered
why Schebesto was mentioned, but I did not ask any questions.
When Shestov was in Novosibirsk I said to him: Schebesto will
visit you and mention my name, you must help him. There was
a message also to Schebesto, not directly from me but through
Sommeregger.
Repeated attempts were made to steal from the head offices
designs and sketches of machinery of Soviet inventions being
tested under actual industrial conditions. This refers to a pneumatic· pkk, drilling machines and so on. Then it was planned
to set fire to the power station. Accor.ding to what Sommeregger
told me later, the central partition in the machinery room was
actually set on fl.re.
Under-ground headings in Pit No. 5-6 were driven in such a
way as' to make electric hauling absolutely impossible. Then
there was proposed what was called the "Shebflo" system, after
the names of its initiators-Schebesto, Flessa and Otto-which
involved a loss of 80 per cent of the coat
Further, attempts were made to stop work on the upper level
in Prokopyevsk. The scraper hoists were deliberately dci;igned in
a criminal way. At the "Koksovaya" Mine the foundations of the
compressors were built in solidly with the foundation of the building. This led to so much vibration of the walls of the building that
they might collapse at any moment.
At the Rllikhimovich Mine, engineer Weber deli~rately delayed the sinking of a dip heading to open up the lowel'" .:ievel,
whkh resulted in an under-output of coking -coal. For two years
engineer Hauer, ignoring the advantages O<f Enghis:h and American
·equipment, was engaged in making new drawings for only such
equipment as .i:s mam:factu:ed by Ger.man finns in the hope tlljlt
we would purchase this eqmpment from them. Flessa endeavoured
in every way to discredit the equipment sqpplied by the Kulakov Works and insisted on ordering electrical equipment ·from
abroad.
I will not say that all the seventy German citizens who worked
with us were wreckers and diversionists. By no means. These
wrecking activities were conducted by the six persons- I chaVe
enumerated, and also by tihose persons mentioned hy Shestov. "One
may also mention Stickling, who worked in the Severnaya ·Pit.
I must now say something about our planning. This work was
headed by the Trotskyite Vershkov, but I was in touch with it.
Every pit was planned and .designed as though the outlets belonged to separate owners, without reference to approaches, elee274

tric power and roads, with the result that pits were handed over
for operation ibut actua:lly they rouild not work
·
Vyshinsky:.To what state did. you redu~ the Kemerovo Mine?
Stroilov: The last time I was there was iri 1935. I was sum~
moned by the manager of the mine because the social and Party
organizations were beginning to look askance at the way the work
was being done. I found the mine in a bad way. The heading
was so low that it was impossible to open up stopes, while the
tubs and electric locomotives ·did not permit the normal supply
of props. No relation at all was maintained between the seams.
Ventilation was neglected. Capital construction work for the second
level was not :being pel'lfomned. I had never seen work in such a
state anywhere: This was .the reS1U:lt of the wrecking activities
carried on by Peshekhonov's group. I was obliged to tell him to
use his brains and to sfop being so crude. My instructions were
not observed.
In reply to f!he question why he had taken no measures, ·when
I had given pers·onal instructions both as the le3!der of the counterrevolutionary organization and as chief ertgineer, he said that he
had spoken to my deputy, -Andreyev-chief of construction-and
they had decided not to improve the state of the mine, assuming
that I would not object.
· vyshinsky: And you?
Stroilov: I objected.
Vyshinsky: Why did you oibject?
Stroilov: Well, it was much too crude.
Vyshinsky: Too much of it?
Stroilov: Too much.
Vyshinsky: Dangerous?
Stroilov: Dangerous, because all around there are people with
heads on their shoulders, who 'µnderstood that work should not be
done in this way.
.
Vyshinsky: They over<lid it?
Stroilov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you wanted.
.
Stroilov: No·, I did not want what was· there.
Vyshinsky: What did you want?
Stroilov: I?
Vyshinsky: Yes, you.
Stroilov: I wanted the output lo be about 5 per cent lower.
Vyshinsky: A little lower?
·.
·
Stroilof!: -And. cost of production about 50 kopeks highei;.
Vyshinsky: Why did you calculate in this way: output, 5 Per
cent lower, and cost of production, 50 kopeks higher, and so forth?
27Ci

Stroilov: Because that would not be so noticeable.
Vyshinsky: For safety's sake?
Stroilov: Yes, to put it that way, that's right, for safety's
sake.
Vyshinsky: Proceed.
Stroilov: \Veli, really, that's the main point.
The President: The Court grants the application of the State
Prosecutor to include in !he materials of the case the certificate of the manager of the Hotel Savoy stating· that the foreign
citizen Berg stayed at the hotel from December 1 to 15, 1930.
The certHicate. is signed by the hotel manager, and bears a seal.
Similarly, the Court grants the application of the State Prosecutor to include in the materials of the case the Telephone and
Address Directory of the German Reich, VII edition, Vol. II, containing Wiister's Berlin address, which is identical with the address
in Stroilov's notebook.
Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*

*

*

. Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: The session is resumed. Comrade Vyshinsky,
have you any questions?
Vyshinsky; I have no questions to put to Stroilov.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions to put
to Stroilov?
·
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.}
Vyshinsky: I want to ask the Court, in connection with accused
Stroilov's testimony concerning his connections in Mosc05v with
a number of German engineers, in particular, with \Viister, Be:i:g,
Flessa and Schebesto, to include in the materials of the case
two entry permit files of the Foreign Section of the Administrative Department of the Presi.dium of the Moscow Regional
Executive Committee, concerning the entry and place of residence of these engineers in the U.S.S.R. That is the first
request.
Secondly, I want to ask the Court to submit to Stroilov 20
photographs of various foreigners and to ask him to identify
the photographs of \.Viister, Berg, Flessa and Schebesto in order
that there may be no doubt whatever that these persons really exist
and had the connections referred to by Stroilov in his te"Sfimony.
Thus, 4 entries and 20 photographs; none of the photographs
bears a name. I want this estaiblished.
The President: The Court deems it advisable for Stroilov, in
the event of his identifying the persons, to write their names in
his own hand on the back of the photographs.
Vyshinsky: I ask that Stroilov write the names of these persons
276

on the back of the photographs. I also ask that the same also be
submitted to Shestov for identification.
The President: The same photographs?
Vyshinsky: The same photographs.
The President: The Court grants the Procurator's appJication
to include in the materials of the case 4 entry permit files of
the Foreign Section of the Administrative. Department of the
Presidium of the Moscow Regional Executive Committee concerning the issue of right of entry and residence in the U.S.S.R.
to Reinhold Wiister, an entry file concerning Schebesto, an
entry file concerning the issue of an identity certificate for residence in the U.S.S.R. to Hermann Berg and a fourth file of the same
Foreign Section of the Administrative Department of the Moscow
Soviet concerning right of entry in the U.S.S.R. for Wilhelm Flessa.
Comrade Secretary, submit these 20 photographs to accused
Stroilov. ·
[Secretary Kostyushko submits the photographs to accused
Stroilov.]
·
The President: Accused Stroilov, on the back of the photographs
of the persons you recognize, write their names and your signature
and date.
Stroilov (examining the photographs): I think this is Schebesto.
The President: Do you think that, or are you quite sure that
this is Schebesto?
Stroilov: Yes, this is Schebesto.
This is engineer Dehlmann, son of the manufacturer Dehlmann.
Vyshinsky: Do you know the initials of the. manufacturer
Dehlmann?
Stroilov: No.
· This is von Berg. Only, usually I saw him m a grey suit;
here he is wearing a black one.
This is Wiister.
This is Flessa.
Vyshinsky: Thus, of the 20 photographs you can identify only
fou.r?
Stroilov: Five: von Berg, Schebesto, Flessa, Dehlmann's son
and \Viister.
·
Vyshinsky: I am interested in four persons. I ask that it be
certified whether the persons· identified in these photographs by
Stroilov, whether these photographs correspond to those attached
to the official documents in the entry files, or not.
. The Pl'e11ident: The Court. certifies that the photograph identified by ~troilov as that of von Berg is identical with the photo~
graph. ill thfl entry permit file of the Adrn!nistrative Dep.artment of
277

the Moscow Soviet and attached to a foreigner's identity certificat~.
Vyshinskg: I ask that the number of the entry permit file be
mentioned.
The President: The number of the identity certificate is
257199. The identity certifkate is made out to the German citizen
Hermann Berg, granting right of temporary residence in the
U.S.S.R. for one month as from October 24, 1929.
Vyshinsky: Year of issue of the identity certificate?
The President: Issued by the Mos~ow Administrative Department on October 24, 1929. The .photograph attached to this identity certificate is quite identical with the photograph' submitted
to Stroilov, and which the latter identified as that of Berg. . ·
The photograph which accused Stroilov identified as that of
Wiister is identical with the photograph attached to the entry
permit file of the Foreign Department of the Moscow Soviet
containing a number of questionnaires and. other documents
conoerning the German subject Wiister. The file bears the number
186929, dated June 1931.
The photograph which accused Stroilov jdentified as that of
citizen Flessa is quite identical with· the photograph attached to
the questionnaire and signed by Wilhelm Flessa. The questionnaire was filled in by Flessa, if I am not mistaken, .on September
11, the year is not very clear, either 1930 or 1931.
There is another document dated April 1935 concerning the
same citizen Wilhelm Flessa. The photograph identified by Stroilov is quite identical with ·the photograph attached to t}le questionnaire signed by citizen Flessa.
~..,_
The entry permit file of the Administrative Department of the
Moscow Soviet for foreign citizen Schebesto contains a photograph attached to a questionnaire signed Schebesto. This photo·graph is quite identical with that submitted to Stroilov and which
he identified as Schebesto's.
. (To Vyshinsky.) You asked that the photographs be submitted
to accused Shestov?
Vyshinsky: I ask the Court to certify that in Berg's entry there
is an application for registration of his ·entry visa dated November 30, 1930.
The President: Yes, I certify that in citizen Berg's en.tr.y .there_
is an application dated November 30, 1930, addressed to the Administrative Department of the Moscow Regional Executive ComJ
mittee.
. .
Vyshinsky: The photographs will have lo be submitted tQ
Shestov.
/'
.
The Pre$ident; Other copies wiU hav.e to be submitted,
~78

[The Secretary submits the photographs to Shestov.J
Shestov: On this photograph I recognize Flessa. On this photograph I recollect Scbebesto.
Vyshinsky': How very modest, recollect! Is it he, or not?
Shestov: Yes, it is be. Schebesto is the director of the firm of
Frohlich-Kliipfel-Dehlmann.
The President (reads}: I certify that the photograph identified
by Shestov as that of Flessa is the same as that in the eqtry permit
file of the Administrative Department of the Moscow Soviet. . . ..
The photograph which accused Shestov identified as that . of
Schebesto is in the entry permit file of fue Administrative Department of the Moscow Soviet. . . . As for the photograph of the
director of the firm of Frohlich-Kliipfel-Dehlmann, I have no
document with which to compare it.
Are there any other questions?
Vyshinsky: I have not a ·question but a request to the Court:
to note Vol. L V, p. 432. 1 will not read it; it refers to what Stroilov said in April 1933. The record speaks about the cause of the
fire--the fire was · caqsed deliberately by contact of electric
wires.
The President (to Stroilov}: Accused Stroilov, have you any
questions?
·
Stroilov: No.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: We will now proceed to examine accused
· Xorkin.
Accused Norkin, do you confirm the testimony you gave in
January this year?
,Vorkin: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What was your position at Kemerovo?
Sorkin: I was chief of the Kemerovo Combined Works Construction.
Vyshinsky: Hence, on the Kemerovo Combined Works Construction you were the principal person?
Norkin: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Who appointed you to that post?
Norkin: The People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry.
Vyshinsky: No, the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry
is a huge institution. Who personally?
Norkin: Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: For what purpose?
Norkin: At that time the question did not stand like that,
Vyshinsky: What do you mean, "like that"?
~79

Norkin: I was sent there because in the chemical industry, in
which I had worked until then, I had had some difficulties and
-trouble, art'd evidently I was sent to Kemerovo for a certain purpose
which became clear to me later, but I did not know it at the time
I was sent there.
Vyshinsky: When did it become clear to you, and what be-came clear to you?
- Norkin: In 1933 it became clear to me that the reason I was
sent to Kemerovo was that I was supposed to carry on destructive
work in the most important plant of the chemical industry, which
is of enormous importance for defence purposes.
Vyshinsky: It was clear to you that you were sent there for
lhat purpose?
·
Norkin: It became clear.
Vyshinsky: What circumstances .made this clear to you?
Norkin: It became clear to me from the instructions I received
in 1933 as a member of the Trotskyite organization from the person who was immediately directing my work, Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: What did Pyatakov tell you?
Norkin: In the main, his instructions were to work in the direction of retarding this construction work for the purpose of undermining the power of the state.
Vyshinsky: That is the main thing?
Norkin: The main thing in a few words.
Vyshinsky: Was anything said about capital investments, and
the attitude you were to take?
~
Norkin: To invest large amounts of capital with the least effect.,,_
and to invest the capital not in the principal objects, but in those
of less importance.
·
Vyshinsky: That is to say, to tie up the capital?
Norkin: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Was anything said about the mobilization preparedness of the various installations which were important for
defence? ·
Norkin: I confirm what I have said. The whole plant is important for defence. Inasmuch as part of the capital was diverted,
this led to the weakening of the units that are important for
defence. The principal method of our work was to alter tlfe- de-sigr_is of the various plants mainly on the pretext of increasing
their capacity, or of rationalizing them, to delay the designing
work, to delay construction.
Vyshinsky: It was put as clearly as that?
Norkin: I have ~omewh~t deciphered it, Ther~ wa& nQ need
2fl()

for us in our conversations to talk about this in detail, it was
sufficiently clear.
Vyshinsky: All these instructions were given you by Pyatakov?
Norkin: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In what year?
Norkin: In 1933.
Vyshinsky: When were you appointed to. Kemerovo?
Norkin: In 1932.
Vyshinsky: How long after you were appointed, approximately?
Norkin: Approximately, about a year, or a little less, about
ten months.
Vyshinsky: When you were ·appointed,. did Pyatakov talk to
you about the criminal organization to which he and you· be·
longed?
Norkin: I had been drawn into the organization before that.
Vyshinsky: I am not asking you that, we know when you were
drawn into the organization. What interests me is this: when
you were appointed to Kemerovo, did Pyatakov talk to you about
your underground, criminal activities, or not?
Norkin: This I cannot say, I do not remember.
Vyshinsky: Say what you can say.
Norkin: As far as I remember I did not speak to Pyatakov
before-my departure, but I spoke to another official of the People's
Commissariat, Comrade Pavlunovsky . . . .
Vyshinsky: What about?
Norkin: . . . who actually was, as it were, officially in charge
of this construction work, and who was sending and fitting me
out for Kemerovo.
Vyshinsky: Fitting you out in an official capacity?
Norkin: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What did you talk about?
Norkin: He gave me instructions how to carry on the work
in accordance with the tasks which had been set for the construction.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, about your work in Kemerovo, for
which you were officially appointed?
Norkin: I emphasize that I did not speak to Pyatakov before
my departure; I received instFuctions from Pavlunovsky, who had
nothing to do with our counter-revolutionary activities.
Vyshinsky: Pavlunovsky had nothing to do with your activities?
NorL:in: No, I am speaking of (lfficial activities.
·
Vyshinsky: Hence, you went to Kemerovo -with the old instrucHons you had received from Pyatakov before? When, precisely?
Norkin: I count my membership of the organization from 1931.

281

Then it was that the main directives of the Trotskyite organization
were received.
Vyshinsky: After Pyatakov's return from abroad?
Norkin: While I was listening to accused Pyatakov's testimony
I was turning over in my mind how it occurred, and I must say that
I cannDt <lispute the fact that it was after his arrival from abroad.
Although in my testimony I mentioned an earlier date, I do not
insist· upon it. At that time I made the reservation that I .did not
remember the exact month. It seemed to me that it was gome
what earlier. Now, I must confirm that there was a certain inaccuracy.
Vyshinsky: Hence, this was, evidently, as you now recall. . . .
Norkin: It was at the end of 1931 and not in the first months.
Vyshinsky: And in 1932, did you meet •Pyatakov?
·
Norkin: I had many meetings with Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: And in 1932?
Norkin: In 1931 and in 1932 and in 1933. . .
Vyshinsky: And during your conversations did you discuss
these criminal activities?
Norkin: I think that, as a rule, we discussed these activities at
every meeting.
·
Vyshinsky: What was the subject of your conversations?
Norkin: In 1932 I did not receive any special instructions from
Pyatakov about Kemerovo, the more so, that I left in 1932, at the
end of the year. I remember there were very severe frosts, such
as occur in the last ten days of December, or in the first ten days
of January.
~"'
Vyshinsky: And at subsequent meetings?
~-... .
Norkin: The most ·definite conversation at which the conciet~
tasks at the Kemerovo Combined Works Construction were formulated for me took place in 1933. Of subsequent conversations concerning our joint activities I must mention the conversation in the
middle of 1935 when more drastic instructions were given to in-f
crease destructive activity, and the conversation which took place
recently, before my arrest, at which I was insfructed to organize
explosions and fires during war.
Vyshinsky: Didi you have any connection with Rataichak?
Norkin: I had no direct connections with Rataichak. Subsequently, I learned that Rataichak was one of our men.- ·- - . - ...
Vyshinsky: When, subsequently?
·
·
Norkin: That must have been after Rataichak had been in
Kemerovo. That was at the end of 1935.
Vyshinsky~ How did you learn this, why?
Norkin: I recejved an instruction from Rataichak and it turned
out that he was pursuing the same object that I was, only his tac282

tics were -different. 1 am referring to the construction of a factory
on the righ~ bank. It was our intention to retard this construction
work by our usual methods. Rataichak proposed new methods, but
this entailed blowing up the foundations and very big ·alterations.
In short, this meant a lot of noise, but no effect. I tried to protest,
but I received instructions to obey Rataichak because he was one
of our men.
Vyshinsky: What have you done concretely in the matter-·of
wrecking?
Norkin: In this respect ·1 wanted.. _ .
Vyshinsky: Summarize it. .
Norkin: Summarized, it is as foilows: most important construction works, of major importance for defence purposes, were
retarded. One very palpable result was that there were cases of disruption of the electrical supply in the Kuznetsk Basin.
Vyshinsky: What have you to say about acts of diversion?
Norkin: In 1935 I received instructions from Pyafakov to concentrate on the main units so as to achieye, withoutscattering our
forces, the maximum results.
·
Accordingly, I planned to put the State District Power Station
out of action by means of explosions. In February 1936 there were
three explosions.
Vyshinsky: Actually occurred?
Norkin: Yes. After that I had to abandon this operation because
there was enormous pressure from the workers, and. moreover, I
received in<>tructions to stop using volatile coals, and I had to abandon this method. On the contrary, I already thought it. time to
take measures to ward off the blow against myself, that is to say,
to bring up very sharply the question of the Kuznetsk Basin electrical supply and to carry out several measures really directed
towards its improvement.
Vyshinsky: \Vb.at dtid you do that for·?
Norkin: After the three explosions-for although they only
count two, actually there were three, as the first occurred in the
early part of 1February, and the second a few days after and the
two were counted as one--in order to preclude the possibHity of
exposure which would draw attenrtion, this is clear, I decided to
raise the question of alleviatfrig the electricaJ supply problem in
the Kuznetsk Basin, but this did not materiailize, and my request
was -rejected..
Vyshinsky: Were you approached by saif.ety inspectors and
warned that what ypu were doing might lead to dangerous explo·
sions?
·
·
Norkin: Yes, ·

Vyshinsky: Was there, for example, a case when Ponomaryov
and Monosovich approached you?
Norkin: I do not remember Monosovich, bnt I do know Ponomaryov. He was chief of a department.
Vyshinsky: Did you know that on .January 26, 1938, Ponomaryov sent the chief of the boiler room a note warning him
about this. I ask the Court's permission to read p. 1106 of Vol.
CLXIX.
The President: Very well.
Vyshinsky: This note readls as follows: "that the crushlng of
certain coals .jg dangerous and may cause a big explosion leading
to the destruction of equipment and injury to the staff:'
Norkin: I saw this document.
Vyshinsky: Let us first discuss what is correct in this document
and afterwards we will single out what is an exaggeration, what
is a departure from the truth, and so /forth. Wais there wch a fact?
Norkin: Yes, yes.
Vyshinsky: Was such a warning given?
Norkin: It was. There is an official regulation prohibiting the
use of volatile coals in the plant, signed by the chief engineer.
Vyshinsky: Did the fact mentioned in this note occur?
Norkin: It diid.
Vyshinsky: Is it an official note?
Norkin: Yes.
Vysliinsky: Hence, you were warned that such a system of
coal feeding created the danger of explosions and that the measures of precaution you were taking were inadequate?
;,:., _
Norkin: Thls note was not addressed to me, but to the mana~
of the State District Power Station; and measures were not taken
by me, but by Ponomaryov.
Vyshinsky: I know. But there was a note addressed\ to you,
Norkin, chief of the Kemerovo construction work, couched in the
following terms:
"Herewith I enclose a memorandum addiressed fo me bv the
manager of the boiler room, Ponomaryov, about the danger c$.used
to the station by burning -certain coals. Having your verbal
instruction concerning the burning of coals, on the basis of which
I, in my turn, gave orders to the manager of the boiler r()()in, in
violation of existing written regulations, and, bearing in mind-that
the crushing of certain coals may ca1USe explosionsi dangerous for
the equipment, I ask you to give orders to stop supplying us with
these coals." Is this a fact?·
Norkin: Yes, I confirm it.
Vyshinsky: Do you know that on January 31, 1936, the labour
inspector wrnt~ to the manager of the boiler room 1 thi~ same
284

Ponomaryov, an order, indicating "term of execution-immediately," stating that, in pursuance of Art. 148 of the Code of Labour
Laws: "I once again order you to carry out instructions contained
in such and such reports to stop burning coals so as to avoid explosions . . . ." 1s this also a fact?
Norkin: Yes.
l'yshinsky: What else need there be sai.d from the point of
view of the factual side? For a certain period, from 1936, you or
people subordinated to you, were warned about explosions?
Norkin: I was warned iby all these people. This work was done
in the face of great resistance on the part of 1ihe workers. I inust
confirm that.
Vyshinsky: But did these facts occur?
Norkin: They did.
·
Vyshinsky: Were warnings given?
Norkin: They were.
l'yshinsky: Did the explosions take place?
Norkin: I have already said that.
Vyshinsky: Continue.
Norkin: This is the principal act of diversion which I personally committed.
Vyshinsky: Algebra again!
·Norkin: But I translated this into the langua.ge of the concret<>
conditions of Kemerovo_a,nd displayed a certain amount of independent initiative myself. . ___
·
Vyshinsky: Di.version was easier to carry out arithmetically
than algebraically?
Norkin: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: Did Pyatakov give you any instructions about this
act of diversion?
Norkin: I have said· alrea,dy that I received instructions in a
more general form, and the choice of the unit in this case. . . ·.
Vyshinsky: Was left to you?
·
Norkin: I emphasize that in the present case it was left to me,
for I received. a number of instructions expressed in arithmetical
terms.
Vyshinsky: Was that simpler?
Norkin: No, it was equally complicated. I only want to emphas·
izc that there is a difference .
. Vyshinsky: A difference in initiative?
Norkin: Yes. I could not refrain from saying that, from em·
phasizing this circumstance.
Vyshifsky: Did you have any connection with the terrorist
activities of your underground organization?
Norkin: I had no direct connection.
285

Vyshins.ky: Did you have any indirect connection'!
Norkin: I knew that such work was carried on.
Vyshinsky: From whom did you hear it?
Norkin: I had direct connections only \vith Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: I ask you: from whom did you hear ~t? .
Norkin: All that I could learn about guiding instructions I
lea.med from Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat did you know about these terrorist activi·.
ties?
.
Norkin: I knew that the murder of Sergei Miron~vich Kirov
was a terrorist act committed by the organization. I knew that the
Trotskyite organization had planned and was preparing to carry
out a number of other acts against the leaders of the Party and the
government. Presented in that way, I knew about these questions.
Vyshinsky: What was the last position you held in the Party'?
Norkin: I was a member of the Territory Committee of the
Party, and a member of the Bureau of the City Committee of the
Party.
·
. .
.
Vyshinsky: A member of the Bureau of the City Committee and
.a member aJ the West-Siberian Territory Committee?.
Norkin: Yes. ·
Vyshinsky: And simultaneously, you were a member of the
underground Trotskyite, anti-Soviet, terrorist, diversive, espionage
and wrecking organization?
Norkin: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vere there any occa.sfons on which you rendered
, members of your underground organization certain ser-efrces by
.taking advantage of your position as member of the Territory
,Committee of the Party?
'Norkin: I do not remember any cases of that kind.
Vyshinsky: In regard to Drobnis, for example?
Norkin.<\Vhat about Drobnis?
Vyshinskg: Then I will re:rn.!i.nd you of what the records- of the
preliminary investigation enable me to remind you. You learned
·something concerning Drobnis. . . .
. . .
..
N()rkin: Oh! . \ .. You are talking about material assistance to
Drobnis?
I
.
. ·l'gshinsky: I skid: did you render any assistance to members
of your undergroilnd organization, taking advantage of yO-iir, Nor-k·in's, position as member of the Territory Committee?
Norkin: I took advantage of my position in the Party and·_consequently, in the Territory Committee, for the purpose of concealing my criminal activit~~s. Of course, I used it in every way in
the interests of my organiiation.
Vyshinsky: Specifically?
286

1'.'orkin: \Vhy, everything that was clone.
Vyshinsky: \,Yas there a case where you, having learned that
Drobnis had been exposed as a Trotskyite, took measures to warn
him about ·it?
·
l\'orkin: Of course. As soon as I heard that the situation was
becoming tense---:-the question.of his arrest had not yet arisen. • . .
In short, I immediately passed on everything I learned in the
Territory Committee about the activities of the members of the
organization.
Vyshinsky: And about the measures taken against these adivities?
Norkin: Everything I heard in the Territory Committee that
endangered the Trotskyite organization or any of its members, I
of course immediately utilized eiiiher to communicate further or
to guide myself by.
Vyshinsky: When was that?
Norkin: I would not undertake to say exaetly when that was.
Vyshinsky: It was in 1936.
Norkin: Yes, it was in 1936, shortly before Drobnis'. arrest,
approximately in July 1936.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen were you arrested?
Nor kin: On September 30.
Vyshinsky: Did you begin to testify at once?
Norkin: No, not at once.
Vyshinsky: You refused?
Norkin: Yes, I refused.
Vyshi.nsky: Did you refuse for a long time?
Norkin: Yes, for a fairly long time; I refused to testify for approximately two months or so.
Vyshinsky: Why, what restrained you?
Norkin: Very many reasons.
Vyshinsky: Mention the most important.
Norkin: I want to mention one of the reasons. Other accused
have stated here the reason for that resistance. I want to mention
one fact which is not taken _into account. I refer to Pyatakov's
article in Pravda in which he expressed his attitude towards the
first trial.
Vyshinsky: The trial of the Zinoviev-Kamenev united centre?
Norkin: Yes.
·
·
Vyshinsky: \\'hy the first? There were other trials, for example
the trial of Nikolayev.
Norkin: I have in mind ilie trial of our· organization.
Vyshinsky: You are .speaking about the article in Pravda.
Norkin: I am speaking about the article in Pravda in which
Pvatakov shouted "Bravo, bravo, Chekists." This article played an

287

important part in the sense of resistance, in the sense of my attempts to disann and to do what I did subsequently.
Vyslzinsky: In what sense, precisely?
Norkin: I could no:t interpret that article otherwise than as a
signal to keep firm, as an irnsfruction to "hold tight." I thought that
Pyatakov had means of continuing the struggle. Although, when
I was arrested, and even befq-re that, the hopelessness of the fight
was clear to me, nevertheless~ I held o.ut a fairly long time after
my arrest.
Vyshinsky: Under the influence. . . .
Norkin:, I quoted this in a.dclition to the or.dinary reasons which
make it difficult to give up the game when you have committed
crimes. But apart from the usual factors mentioned here, that
article was for me a restraining factor which compelled me to hold
out: I could not assimilate the meaning of some of the phrases i:n
that article in any different sen!Se.
Vyshinsky: Which phrases?
Norkin: I have already said: "Bravo, bravo. . . . " The jaunty
and breezy, style in which that article was written could not be
ot.herwise explained except as a clearly un.derstood hint to "hold
tight"; and I kept tight.
Vyshinsky: And why did you afterwards decide to give way?
Norkin: Because there is a limit to everything.
Vyshinsky: Perhaps pressure was brought to bear upon you?
Norkin: I was questioned, exposed, ther·e were confrontations.
Vyshinsky: You were confronted with evi.~ence, facts?
.Norkin: There were confrontations.
~
Vyshinsky: How were you kept? 'What were youf-prison conditions 1ike?
Norkin: Very good. Are you asking me about outward pressure?
Vyshinsky: Yes.
Norkin: There was no pressure ·whatever.
Vyshinsky: A man can be deprived of good food, deprived of
sleep. \Ve know this from the history of capitalist prisorns. He can
be deprived of cigarettes.
Norkin: If that is what you are talking about, there was nothing like it.
-- . ·Vyshinsky: Did they feed you well?
Norkin: They were extremely attentive.
Vyshinsky: The evidence brought against you was weighty
·enough? Did that evidence play any role?
Norkin: Of course, what played a role was that I realized the
hopelessness of the struggle, and realized that it was fl;ecessary
to bring the whole thing to light.
--.~-

288

:__

·--

Vyshinsky: But you did not realize this on the eve of your
arrest?
Norkin: I did. This is a process that is not completed in a day.
I did not arrive at the position in whic.fi I find myself now in one
day. It was not that I was a mem'ber of the Party one day and
became a diversionist the next. This is a prolonged process of remoulding of the brain and of the perception ~f things. The. process
of returning and the process of giving up the fight were, of course,
also prolonged; but I have replied to your direct question as to
why I kept firm. I have mentioned. the factor which played a
definite ro'le in my case.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions.
The President: I have two questions. Accused Norkin, you had
repeated conversations with Pyatakov on the methods of seizing
power. On which forces, internal and external, were you calculating: at all events, which forces did you discuss in your conversations with Pyatakov in 1935-36?
Norkin: I have already said that I had very many conversations
with Pyatakov, scores of conversations, on a variety of subjects.
The President: I said: which forces <lid you calculate on?"
Norkin: On different forces at each different period.
The President: I am speaking of 1935-36.
Norkin: In 1935-36 we did not discuss this subject. Perhaps
there were such dis-cussions in the beginning of 1935. In short, I
do not undertake to relate it in chronological order. At all events,
I for one avoided such discussions because they cannot be con·
ducted without coming up against very serious contradictions. At
first there were such discussions; in 1934, and perhaps in 1935~ The
question was perfectly clear.
The President: I want to know what conversations you had with
Pyatakov about the methods of seizing power, not in the 1931-32
period but in the following years?
· Norkin: The methods were- as follows: terrorism, at first resistance and obstruction, then wrecking and diversive acts, and also
irrvitation of foreign capital on son:ie basis or other, technical aid,
concessions; then there were hints at an alliance.
The President: Whose hints, what alliance? Did Pyatakov _hint
at it?
Norkin: Yes, it was Pyafakoiv. Pyatakov of course gave me
guidance in these questions, especially when they passed beyond
the bounds of hom.e affairs. I could never claim to have an independent stand on international questions.
·. ·
The President: On what forces were you re-ckoning-internal
or external?
Norkin: Both on internal and on external forces.
289

The President: \Vhat were the internal forces?
Norkin: As for internal forces, we had reckoned on the masses,
at first to a greater extent. Subsequently the masses disappeared,
and we began to reckon on elements who had an interest in a
change of policy-that is to say, on kulak and capitalist elements.
The President: So you reckoned on kulak elements within the
country? And on what others?
Norkin: On no others.
The President: In your testimony this has been put in a somewhat more explicit way: "We could not reckon on the sympathy
of the working masses or the peasantry; they sided with the Central Oommittee. Consequently we did not hope for any aid from
within lhe country in seizing power." You placed your hopes on
the remnants of the kulak class, its left-overs?
Norkin: Yes, on the remnants of the kulak class.
The President: On whose aid within the country were you
reokoning, apart from the kulaks?
Norkin: On no other aid.
The President: And outside?
Norkin: In recent years X did not talk about that.
The President: I ani not asking about that. On whose forces
were you reckoning at the end of 1934 and the beginning of 1935?
Norkin: On attracting aid from without, on foreiign capitaL
The President: At what price?
Norkin: The question of price was not discussed. Besides
that.. . . .
~
The President: But Pyatakov hinted at the price at~which
aid might be given?
Norkin: There were no hints at all.
The President: Was there any talk about admitting foreign
capital?
,
Norkin: There were very many conversations about admitting
foreign capital, even quite specific conversations.
The President: How was this specified?
Norkin: There was talk of concessions, of calling in technical
aid, of extension of the intercourse with foreign countries, of
modification of our foreign trade policy with a view to expanding
it, and so forth. All this was spoken of. Apart from tMs, the· question of an alliance cropped up at one of the last conversations. I
took this in an abstract sense, but it was also put concretely; there
was talk about Germany.
The President: But did Pyatakov hint that certain negotiations
were being conducted by the Trotskyite centre with certain foreigners?
290

Norkin: Such negotiations unquestionably did take place, and
l have given testimony to this effect.
The President: Do you confirm your testimony on this point?
Did you know in 1934, 1935 and 1936 what negotiations were
being conducted by leading Trotskyites, and with which foreign
personages?
Sorkin: I confirmed this in my testimony .and am confirming it
now, but this was not stated specifically.
The President: You did not oppose this?
Norkin: I accepted this formula.
The President: As a .directive?
Norkin: I accepted it; it :Seemed to me to fit in with llhe general
trend af these ideas.
The President: Th.e last question. When Pyatakov in July 1936
gave instructions to consider the question of the organization of
arson at the chemical works, did you express the fear that workers
might be killed?
Norkin: I testified about this.
The President: I recollect that you personally expressed your
.fears that workers might be killed?
Norkin: This is recor-ded in my testimony, and I said it not
once but many times.
Vyshinsky: How did Pyatakov answer you?
Norkin: Pyatakov answered that sacrifices were inevitable, and
it was here that he UJSed that phrase of his which I corroborated
yesterday about "wasting my pity."
The President: And he added: "And then it isn't us they will
blame."
Norkin: I confirm all this, painful though it is .
. The President: At the end of this sentence of yours you have
the following wor·ds: "To tell the truth, Pyatakov always regarded
the working class with -contempt."
Norkin: You see, I did feel a kind of arrogance about himthat I must say. I could never feel that our attitude was the same.
The President: \Vhat form did this arrogance take?
Norkin: It found expression in a great many facts. ,This is
difficult to explain. You see, it is a matter of feeling to a lar,ge
extent. That is my conviction. Now it is clear; and even then I
felt it. I explained it by the· fact that the man had lost contact
with the masses. I felt this very keenly, especially at the end of
1935 and the beginning of 1936. In short, I do not think that
I am exaggerating; I run giving sufficiently objective testimony.
I have no need now to make false statements.
The President: H~ve the Counsel for Defence any questions to
put to Norkin?
291

Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: There remains one more accused of the Siberian
group-Arnold, and the witness Stein. Do you t11ink it expedient
to examine the accused Arnold or the witness Stein?
Vyshinsky: I think it necessary to examine the witness Stein.
. Before examining the witness, permit me fo ask the Court to
give a ruling on a number of questions which were referred by
me in court today to the expert, Comrade Lekus, in connection
with the testimony of the accused Shestov and Stroilov. If there
is no objection on the part of ilie accused, I would ask the Court
to define its attitude to lliese questions and thereby enable the
expert to prepare an answer to these questions.
And I have the same request in regard to the expert Pokrovsky,
in connection with the criminal activities of Norkin and Drobnis
on the Kemerovo Combined Chemical Works construction.
In .addition to lliis, my request is1 that if there is no objection
on the part of the accused, ilie experts should give by this evening
or by tomorrow morning their answers to the questions put to
them.
The President: I think it expedient to give a copy of your quesl.ions to the accused Shestov, Stroilov, Norkin and Drobnis.
Vyshinsky: In view of the fact that formulations of a legal
character may occur, I would even request that the counsels for
defence taking part in the trial, even if they are not defending
lliese particular accused, should also study these questions and
assist the accused in the formulation of their answers to these
questions.
~
Counsel for Defence: (Agree.}
~ .......
The President: The Court has no objection.
The President (to the Commandant): Please ask witness Stein
to come in.
(Witness Stein enters the Court.)
(
The President: \Vitness Stein, what is your first name and
patronymic?
Stein: Alex Mikhailovich.
The President: You have to give evidence on fue case of the
accused Shestov. In what language do you want to give evid.enccin Russian or German? We have an interpreter here.
Stein (in Russian): In German.
-- - · · - -The President: Very good. Tell me please, you were born in
1882?

Stein (in Russian): Yes.
The President: \Vere you born at Riga and are you a German
subject?
Stein (in Russian): Yes, a German subject.
292

The President: Where have you been working of late in the
Soviet Union?
Stein (through the interpreter): At Leninsk.
The President: In what capacity?
Stein: I was engineer in charge of installation work.
The President: Wbat post did you occupy?
Stein: I was engineer in charge of installation work at the
electric power stations in Leninsk.
The President (to the interpreter): Convey to him that he has
been summoned for this examination at the request of the Prosecutor.
.
Vyshinsky (to the interpreter): Will you please ask the witness
Stein whether he knows Shestov?
Stein: I first met Shestov in 1934.
Vyshinsky: Have you met him often since then?
Stein (in Russian): I have met Shestov several times.
Vyshinsky: Perhaps you will answer in Russian, since you have
command of Russian to some extent?
.·
The President: The witness has declared that he wants to speak
in German, and he answered in Russian involuntaPily. For us it is
all the same in what language he answers.
Stein (through the interpreter): I understand Russian.
Vyshinsky: Then why did you ask for an interpreter?
Stein: For the sake of exacllitude.
Vyshinsky: A perfectly legitimate demand. If he can answer
in Russian and wants to do so, let him answer in Russian. It is a
matter of complete indifference to us. Obviously, if a man does
not know Russian perfectly, he will make slips.
The President: Since the witness understands Russian, he will
correct the interpreter if he finds that the I.~tter does not translate
quite correctly.
Vyshinsky: Did you see Shestov often?
Stein: Often.
Vyshinsky: And over a period of several years?
Stein: In 1934, 1935 and once in 1936.
Vyshinsky: I ask the witness Stein to confirm whether this is
the Shestov whom he knows.
The President: Witness Stein, please look at the accused (indicating Shestov).
·
Vyshinsky: Is this Shestov?
Stein: Yes.
Vyshinsky (to Shestov): Is th.is the same Ste.in whom you mentioned?
Shestov: Yes, this is Alexei MikhailoVfich Stein.
Vyshinsky: Why Alexei Mikhailovich?
29~

Shesfov: At Anzherka all of us called him "Alexei Mikhailo.
.
Vyshinsky: And what is Stein's real first name and patronymic?
Stein: Alex Mikhailovich.
Vyshinsky: What do ·you know about Shestov's criminal
actions? Do you know anything about the crimes that Shestov
committed?
Stein: Shestov asked me to work for him along the lines of
diversive activities.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, only along the line of diversive
activities?
Stein: Yes, only.
Vyshinsky: And where were you working officially at that
time?
Stein: At Anzberka.
Vyshinsky: In what capacity?
Stein: As superintendent of installation work.
Vyshinsky: Under what circumstances and on what occasion
did Shestov make such proposals to you?
Stein: To begin with, I must tell about my work with the
German engineers who worked with me along these lines earlier,
before I met Shestov.
·
Vyshinsky: Do.
Stein: The first time I talked about this work was with engineer
Wurm.
Vyshinsky: "About this work"-what does that mean?
Stein: Aboot complicity in diversive activities. "'=
Vyshinsky: What do you understand by diversive acTWities?
Stein: \Vrecking work.
Vyshinsky: What do you understand by wrecking work?
Stein: I mean stoppages at the factories, breakdowns and damaging of machines, incorrect laying of cables.
(
Vyshinsky: So the breakdowns and damaging of machines, the
incorrect laying of cables,· etc.-this is how you understood the
work ·which \Vurm proposed?
Stein: Wurm made other proposals to me besides this.
Vysliinsky: \Vhat proposals?
Stein: May I t.:11 the whole story about \Vunn, about how I wa5
brought to do this work?
--·:- - · · - -The President: I must expla•in that the witness Stein may not
name official foreign institutions at the open session of the Court,
nor the names of persons working in these institutions.
Vyshinsky: I ask the President to explain to the witness Stein
that these institutions ·and persb'ns may be named by the witness
nf a session in camera.
·
vich."

294

{The President explains this.]
Stein: May I begin to tell about the commencement of my work
with engineer Wurm?
The President: I have given you· an explanation. Have you
understood it? Apparently we shall have a session in camera towards the end and there you can tell about it in greater detail.
Stein: In 1932 engineer Wurm and SomU?-eregger arrived. Engineer \Vurm came to see me in my apartment, as one German
to another, and on this pretext he struck up an acquaintance with
me. Engineer Wurm said that we had not come to the Soviet Union
to help the Bolshevitks. We had come here in order to help the
German state, German firms.
The point was that we must at all costs damage the machines
that were being imported from Germany, in order that we might
have a chance to import more machines to this country. For this
purpose, we must at all costs destroy the machines in such a way
that the damage would not be attributed to the quality of the machines but to the incapacity of the Russian workers. We· _must
begin by damaging Russian machines.
He told me that this was the duty of every German, and a
man who did not do this had no right to be a German.
At the same time, in 1932, engineer Flesi.sa arrived. He asked
me. whether I had done any wrecking work as yet. I told him l
had not. Thereupon he called me a coward and a traitor to
Germany.
l'yshinsky: \\Tho?
Stein: Engineer Flessa. He gave me direct instructions to start
work. I was to get in touch with Shestov, the mana.ger of the
mine, and Floren, who were to arrive at Anzherka before long.
The President (to the interpreter): \:Vhat are you talking about?
Interpreter: He wants to mention the names of forei.gn state
officials, and I am teUing him that he must not, since he has been
warned accordingly.
The President: I said that the names of official representatives
of official institutions must not be mentioned. Do you understand
me exactly?
Stein: He told me that he was in touCJh with many foreign
engineers who had ma·de very frequent visits to Germany recently,
that he was in touch with th~e foreign engineers and had heard
from his acquaintances who had come to the Soviet Union from
Germany that Germany wanted to regain her former strength at
all costs, and we Germans livinig ihere in the Soviet Union ought to
do wrecking work in order to help Germany in this way.
We had to weaken the Soviet Union by this wrecking work of
ours. As regards practical "'ork, he said it was necessary to dis295

organize the electric power. system in the Soviet Union, and at
the place where I worked, to destroy the storage batteries and
electric locomotives so that the mine haulage system would stop
functioning and mines would be flooded. In answer to my question,
Flessa said that he was receiving instructions from a certajn
pt>rson closely associated with Germany, and that this same person
wou!Ld help usi in the event of these wrecking iacts ending in
failure.
Vyshinsky: Was this person then within the boroers of the
U.S.S.R.?
Stein: Yes ..
Vyshinsky: Did this person occupy any official position?
Stein: Yes.
·
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions.
Stein: In addition to this; Flessa advised me to join the Communist Party ·in order to have greater opportunities of access to
various jobs,
that the wrecking work might thus be intensified.
Vyshinsky: Flessa advised you to ·do this?
. Stein: I am speaking only about FlesSa..
.Yyshinsky: And did you take any steps by way of attempting
to join the Communist Party?
·
Stein: Yes, Flessa advised me to apply to Shestov.
Vyshinsky: So you applied to Shestov? What came of this?
Stein: I want to tell about my acquaintance with Shestov from
the start.
Vyshinsky: I am not interested in that, but if you want to, you
may tell about it.
~
The President: A definite question has been put: hTo:w did
Shestov help you?
Vyshinsky: Perhaps it is more convenient for him to tell th!s
in connection with the story of their relatioD.s.
Stein: I went to see Shestov, and Shestov gave me a form' to
fill out.
Vyshinsky: An appljcation form?
Stein: Yes, an application form.
Vyshinsky: Did you fill it out?
Stein: Yes, I did.
Vyshinsky: To whom did you give it?
--·- __ . _. _
Stein: I handed .in the application to the Party organizer.
Vyshinsky: And what was the result?
Stein: I was not accepted into the Party, because the Party
purge began at that time.
Vyshinsky (to Shestov): Accused Shestov, was there such an
episode \viith Stein, when you wanted to foist him upon the Party?

so

296

Shestov: I recall there was a conversation regarding this
matter.
Vyshinsky: Was there an occasion on which you wanted .to
foist Stein upon the Party?· Can you answer yes or no?
Shestov: Yes, I talked to Stein about this.
Vyshinsky: About what?
Shestov: About his wanting to enter the Party.
Vyshinsky: Did he say so himself?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And was there a conversation with Flessa?
Shestov: I did not have any conversation with Flessa.
Vyshinsky: You did not talk personally a'bout this matter?
Shestov. No.
Vyshinsky: And in general, were there any conversations with
Flessa on matters connected with underground activities?
Shestov: I was not in touch with Flessa, but I recall that Floren
spoke to me about Flessa as a wrecking agent.
Vyshinsky: And you had contact with Floren along these lines?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So from whom might Flessa have known?
Shestov: From Schebesto, from Stroilov, from Floren.
Vyshinsky: Stein applied to you to help him get into the Party?
Shestov: I helped him.
Vyshinsky {to Stein): You applied to Shestov yourself?
Stein: I came to see Shestov in his apartment and applied to
him about this matter.
Vyshinsky (to Shestov): Did you promise to help him?
Shestov: Yes, I promised.
·
Vyshinsky: What form did this assistance take?
Shestov: Most likely I brought him an application fonn, and
probably, being a member of the bureau of the city committee of
the Party, I would have given him the required testimonial.
l'yshinsky: And did you know what sort of a man Stein was?
Shestov: Yes, I knew.
Vyshinsky: And you gave him a testimonial?
Shestov: No, I did not give him one.
Vyshinsky: You proposed.to do so, you promised?
Shestov: Yes .
. Vyshinsky (to Stein): Proceed.
Stein: During this meeting Shestov made me the following
proposal: I was to try at all costs to flood some of the -pits and
hinder the extraction o~ ,coal. I agreed to do th_is. Shestov told
me there was a shortage of people for the organization. I asked
297

for what organization. He answered me that it was mainly a
question of the Trotskyite organization.
Vyshinsky: Did you have a talk with Shestov during which
he told you that he needed people from among the foreigners and
that he was short of Soviet people?
Stein: Not only foreigners. When I called on him he told me it
was a very good thing I had come to see him.
.
Vyshinsky: Did he not tell you that it was difficult for him
to recruit young Soviet engineers?
.
Stein: He said that there were engineers at his mine who
worked very honestly and whom he could not use for this purpose.
Vyshinsky: And so he was very pleased that you had come to
work with him?
Stein: Yes, I was to take charge of this work.
Vyshinsky: Did you meet Shestov in Novosibirsk in 1936?
Stein: This conversation took place in May 1936.
Vyshinsky: This same conversation in which Shestov extended
you this invitation?
Stein: Yes, it was the same conversation, and Shestov then
proposed that I work for him. I want to say something about
Floren.
Vyshinsky: What do you want to say about Floren?
Stein: Floren made me the same praposal as Fle.ssa. Floren
himself had already committed several acts of wrecking at the
mines and was making preparations for a big explosion at Pit
No. 5-7, where he was in touch with the Russian Trotskyites. I do
not know why this explosion for which Floren was maki~ preparations did not take place, but I know that Floren look a very
considerable part in the wrecking acts at the mines.
Vyshinsky: And do you know what sort of people Floren and
Flessa are?
Stein: No, they did not tell me openly what party they belonged to, but I made sure, while talking with them, that they
were fascists.
Vyshinsky: And were they connected with any official person
within the territory of the Soviet Union?
Stein: I do not know about Floren, but in regard to Flessa I
know that he was in touch with an official person residing. in the
Soviet Union.
Vyshinsky: How was he connected with him-as a citizen of
one state with a citizen of another state?
Stein: I declare that this same official person knew about
Flessa's wrecking activities, because Flessa himself told me about
thL<>.
298

Vyshinsky: And was that person connected with the German
intelligence service?
Stein: Flessa told me nothing about this.
Vyshinsky: And you could not conclude that this was so by all
their actions, by their conduct?
Stein: I thought all the time that all the orders which Flessa and
Floren received were received by them from Germany. Only in
his last talk with me Flessa told me that he was receiving these instructions from a certain official person who is now in the Soviet
Union.
Vyshinsky: Is this official person of foreign origin?
Stein: I am not personally acquainted with this persoo.
Vyshinsky: Is he a Soviet citizen?
Stein: He is a man who works for Germany.
Vyshinsky: Works for Germany in an official capacity?
Stein: He is an official person and works in an official capacity.
l'yshinsky: I hav~ no more questions.
The President: Has the defence any questions?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: Have the accused any questions to put to Stein?
The Accused: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: Comrade Commandant, please lead out the witness Stein.
(Witness Stein is led out of the Court.)
The President: What is the opinion of the defence r~arding the
questions put by the prosecutor to the experts?
Braude: We -consider that the questions are correctly framed
from the legal point of view and conform in essence to the facts
of the case. But as regards the possibility of assistance on our part,
we submit that if the accused deem it necessary to add any questions, we will assist them with the legal formulation of these
questions.
The President: Have the accused studied the questions for the
experts? Not yet? Please study them during the recess.
The Court is adjourned till 6 o'clock.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

I'
299

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

JANUARY 2.6, EVENING SESSION, 1937, 6.00 P.M.

Commandant: Please rise, the Court is coming.
The President: The session is resumed.
Accused Shestov, have -you any -corrections or additions to
make to the questions for the experts?
Shestov: No.
The President: Accused Stroilov?
Stroilov: Neither have. I.
The President: Have the Counsel for Defence any additions to
make?
Braude: No, we have none.
The President: Accused Norkin, have you any additional ques·
tions?
·
Norkin: No.
The President: Hasn't Drobnis any either?
Drobnis: No.
The President: The following questions are submitted to the
expert witness, Engineer Lekus (reads):
''Questions Submitted to the Expert Witness Lekw..jn Connection with the Cri'minal Activities of Shestov and Stro·
ilov in the Kuzbas
"A. Pit Fires in the Prokopyevsk Colliery
"l. What were the causes of the fires?

(

"2. \Vhat were the consequences of these fires?
"3. Could these fires have been averted?
"B. State of the Ventilation in the Prokopyevsk Colliery
"1. What were the causes of the bad state of the ventilation?
"2. What were the consequences of the- bad ·state of
the ventilation?
"3. Was it possible to improve the ventilation?

"C. Capital Construction and Reconstruction Work of the
Kuzbas Coal Trust in 1932-36
300

"1. Did the plans of construction work carried out
correspond to the interests of the development of
the coalfield?
"2. What were the consequences of the incorrect planning of the construction work?"
Aproximately how much time will you need to prepare answers to these questions?
·
Lekus: Could I be allowed to present them at tomorrow's
evening session?
'
The President: Why, couldn't we have them by the dinner
recess?
Vyshinsky: Comrade Pn~sident, please allow the experts to be
absent from the evening session; at present they are not required
by the proceedings at all. They will use this evening to prepare
their answers and would be able to present them by the end of
the day tomorrow.
The President: Very well, this means that on condition that you
are released from attending today's evening session you will present your a.nswers iby tomorrow's evening session. ·
·
I will read the question submitted to the expert witness,
engineer Pokrovsky (reads) :

"Questions to Pokrovsky, Chairman of the Commission of
Experts, in Connection with the Criminal Activities of the
-Accused Norkin and Drobnis at the Kemerovo Combined
Works Construction
"A. Explosions at the Kemerovo District Electric Power
Station on February 3 and 9, 1936
"1. What were the causes of the explosions at the Kemerovo District Electric Power Station?
· "2. Could the· explosion have been averted?
"3. Was the explosion due to accident or to malicious
intent?
"B. Breakdowns at the Nitrogen Plant Construction on
March 22 and April 5, 1936
"l. What were the causes of the breakdowns?
"2. Could these breakdowns have been averted?
"3. What were. the consequences of these accidents?
"4. Were the breakdowns due to chance or to malicious intent?
"C. State of Construction Work qt the Kemerovo Combined Works Construction
301

•'L Is the state ·of readiness of the construction units
in accordance with the schedule fixed by the
government?
.
"2. Does the financing correspond with the importance
of the items under construction?
''3. \Vllat is the quality of the construction work?
"4. How do the experts explain the non"fulfilment of
the schedule, incorrect financing and the low quality of construction work?"
Comrade Pokrov.sky, how much time approximately will you
need to prepare the answers to these que5tions?
Pokrovsky: I also sha11 require until 6 p.m. tomorrow, i.e.,
until tomorrow's evening session.
The President: Very welJ.
Thus the experts 'Lekus and Pokrovsky are released from attending today's session. We shall proceed to the examination of the
accused Arnold. Accused Arnold, do you confirm the testimony
·which, you gave in the latter part·of 1936 and in January 1937 at
the office of the Procurator of the U.S.S.R.?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Accused Arnold, what is your real surname?
Arnold: Vasilyev.
.
Vyshinsky: And your first name and patronymic?
Arnold: Valentin Vasilyevich.
·
Vyshinsky: Why do you call yourse1f Valentin Volfridovich·?
Arnold: First of all I should like briefly to tell you my life
story.
~
Vyshinsky: No, you wii.11 relate it in due course. First 1etl us
why you call yourself Valentin Volfridovic:h when your name is
really Valentin Vasilyevich?
Arnold: It happened this way. When I acquired citizenship in
America, my name, according to my passport, was Aimo
Volfrid.
Vyshimky: Are you an American citizen or a Soviet citizen?
A.rnold: Now I am a Soviet citizen.
Vyshinsky: Did you land 1n America as a Soviet or as an American citizen?
Arnold: I landed there as a Finnish citizen.
Vgshinsky: That means that in America you were- gfven th-e
name and patronymic Valentin Volfridovich?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Why?
Arnold: .Because the passport/ I had with me gave my name
as Ailno and my father's name as Volfrid.
:30~

Vyshinsky: But that applied to the person whose passport you
used.
Arnold: To the person from whom I took the passport.
\'yshinsky: That means that you arrived in Ameflica with a
passport that was not your own?
But what was your surname when you were :born?
·Arnold: From the time I first went to .school I was called
Vasilyev.
Vyshinsky: But weren't you called Ivanov?
Arnold: Y ffi, I started school at the age of seven.
Vyshinsky: And before the age of seven?
Arnold: Before the age of seven no one asked me my surname
and I knew nothing.
Vyshinsky:. That means that until you were seven you lived
without any surname whatever?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That means you were born without a surname?
Arnold: I wias born without surname.
Vyshinsky: Perhaps it is indiscreet, but I must ask you where
~ou were 1born and what was your father's surname?
1
Arnold: I was born in Leningrad, my father's surname was Efimov.
Vyshinsky: And your mother's surname?
Arnold: My mother's surname was Ivanova.
Vyshinsky: This is just what I am asking you. So Ivanova takes
part in this matter. But why were you called Vasilyev till the age
of seven?
Arnold: Ai the age of seven, when I entered school, my grandfather did not want to give me his surname--'he's my mother's
father.
Vyshinsky: That's plaiin.
Arnold: And he hated my father; that was why it was decided
to give me the surname Vasilyev.
Vyshinsky: But why Vasilyev and not Petrov?
Arnold: Because my godfather's name was Vasilyev.
Vyshinsky: That means by the time you were seven you had accumulated three surnames: Ivanov, Vasilyev and Efimov and you
chose one--Vasiilyev?
·
Arnold: It was not I who chose 1t, my elders chose it for me.
Vyshinsky: Did you receive any documents to this effect?
Arnold: I received no documents, later I had a birth certificate.
Vyshinsky: But what makes you think you are Vasilyev?
Arnold: Because they called me Vasilyev at school.
Vyshinsky: And why di<l they c~H you Vasilyev a.t school?
Arnold: I don't know why.

a

303

Vyshinsky: Of course, it's hard to understand such matters at
the age of seven. That means that until the age of thirteen you went
by the surname of Vasilyev. Is thar so?
Arnold: No, at the age of thirteen I left Finland.
Vyshinsky: Where were you born?
Arnold: In Leningrad.
Vyshinsky: What school did you go to?
Arnold: I went to elementary school for three years and to
municipal school for four years, in the city of Vyborg in Finland.
Vyshinsky: And how did you happen to .get to Finland?
Arnold: When I was ten months old my mother was unable to
take care of me and sent me to her father, who was the sexton at
a church in the city of Vyborg. Afterwards I went to Leningrad.
Vyshinsky: How old were you .then?
Arnold: I was in my fourteenth year.
Vyshinsky: Under what surname?
Arnold: Vasilyev.
Vyshinsky: What part of Leningrad did you live in?
Arnold: For about a week I liv·ed in Kudryavtsev's sheet-iron
workshop in Apraksin Pereulok, but I had no passport and the
boss did not want .to keep me. All I had were my school certificates.
I knew I had been born in Leningrad and baptized at the Vladimir
Cathedral and the workmen advised me to go there to find my
birth certificate. With this certificate I could get a job. I found the
church, hunted up the deacon and he found me in the records and
gave me the birth certificate.
Vyshinsky: In what name?
~
Arnold: It certified that Valentin, this was the infant's..ttame,
was the son of the soldier's daughter Evdok:ia Mikhailovna ·1vanova, but my surname wasn't given.
Vyshinsky: Did you have any sort of passport?
Arnold: I was only thirteen years old. They arranged for me
to get a job at the factory on the birth certificate.
{
Vyshinsky: As the son of Ivanova'?
Arnold: No, as Vas.ilyev, because my school certificates were in
the surname of Vasilyev, whi_le the birth certificate gave the name
Valentin and no surname whatever.
Vyshinsky: But your mother's surname was Ivanova?
Arnold. Yes. I began working in that facto.Ty as an-upholsterer's
apprentice. It was a furniture and fixtures factory.
· Vyshinsky: How many years did you live in Leningrad?
Arnold: Two years.
Vyshinsky: How old were you when you left?
Arnold: J. was in my sixteenth year.
Vyshinsky: Where did you go then?
1

304

Arnold: I went to Finland, to Vyborg.
Vyshinsky: To your grandfather?
Arnold: My grandfather was dead. I went to live with my uncle.
I started working in a furniture factory.
Vyshinsky: As Vasilyev?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How long did you stay with.your uncle?
Arnold: Not long. I went to Helsingfors.
l'yshinsky: Why did you go to Helsingfors?
Arnold: Because I wanted to work in a big factory and earn
more.
Vyshinsky: So it was poverty that compelled you to go?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: To Helsingifors?
Arnold: To Helsingfors.
Vyshinsky: What did you take up there?
Arnold: I went to work in a furniture factory.
Vyshinsky: How long did you work there?
Arnold: A year and a half.
Vyshinsky: And then?
Arnold: I felt a desire to go to Germany.
Vyshinsky: Why?
Arnold: I wanted to go abroad and try my luck there.
Vyshinsky: How did you manage it?
Arnold: Very simply. I arranged it with a friend of mine. He
gave me his passport. He had just managed to secure it, ibut had
not gone himself.
Vyshinsky: And he let you have it?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What was his name?
Arnold: His name was Karl Rask.
Vyshinsky: First Vasilyev, then alternately Vasilyev and Ivanov,
and then Rad Rask.
Arnold: My surname never was. Ivanov, that was my mother's
surname.
Vyshinsky: \Vhere did you go under the name of Rask?
Arnold: I got a job as a cabin-boy on a boat. I went to Hamburg
.and worked for three or four months in a garage. But from childhood I had dTeamed od' getting to America.
Vyshinsky: And then?
Arnold: I set out for Rotterdam in Holland, but I did not reach
'the border. Here I was detained by the police and they deported
me back to Russia. I returned to Vyborg.
Vyshinsky: Still under the name of Rask?
A.rnold: Still as Rask.
305

Vyshinsky: In what year was that?
Arnold: That was at the beginning of 1913. I worked in Vyborg
until 1914 and then I went to Helsingfors and got a job at the Sveaborg port under lhe name of Vasilyev and put Rask in my pocket
for .the time being.
Vyshinsky: Why didn't you like Rask?
Arnold: Because I was in Vyborg and everybody knew. me
there, and for that reason I couldn't be Rask any longer.
Vyshinsky: How is it everybody knew you? What was the
population of Vyborg?
Arnold: Not more than fifteen or twenty thousand at that time.
Vyshinsky: Perhaps your arithmetic is at fault?
Arnold: Maybe there were more.
Vyshinsky: But in any case you were a well-known figure
there?
Arnold: Rask was not known.
Vyshinsky: But Vasilyev?
Arnold: But Vasilyev was known because lots of people used
to come to church and I went to churd1.
Vyshinsky: Were you a churchgoer?
Arnold: I lived in the church.
Vyshinsky: You said that you went to school?
Arnold: I went to school in Vyborg.
Vyshinsky: And so you put Rask in your pocket and turned
up in Vyborg again as Va:silyev? Did you .stay long in Vy.borg
under the name of Vasi1yev this time?
Arnold: I worked there till the beginning of 191if and then
I went to Helsingfors. \Vhen the war broke out I learned~that r
would soon have to join the army and it occurred to me that I
had better clear out of Finland. With the passport in Rask's.
name in my pocket I went to Sweden and from there I landed in
Norway.
(
Vyshinsky: Your passport in Rask's name was valid for travel
abroad?
Arnold: It was.
Vyshinsky: For an indefiniite period?
Arnold: For five years.
Vyshinsky: So you were aibroad again?
Arnold: Yes, I was, in Norway.
Vyshinsky: And then?
Arnold: Then I shipped on a Swedish boat, made a voyage toEngland and from there we sailed to Stockholm.
Vyshinsky: When was that?
/'
Arnold: That was at the beginning of 1915. From there I felt
306

like going to Vyborg, to my uncle. I arrived in Vyborg on a fishing boat. l\fy uncle told me that I must join the army. I was immediately issued a passport in the name of Vasilyev. With this
passport I went to enlist. I was taken into the army and assigned
lo the Alexander III barracks on Malaya Okhta in Leningrad ..
I remained there about a month ·and a half, but I didn't like the
soldier's life. In genei;al I did not want to fight. Because of this
I skipped the army and went to Helsingfors. Now that I had seen
that army life was bad, I -decided to leave the country. But in
Helsingfors I was arrested for desertion and sent under escort to
Leningrad. In Leningrad I was tried and sentenced to six months.
After I had served the sentence, I was sent with the very first
company to the front and landed in the village of Stotsmanshof,
near Riga. Here I contracted pneumonia and remained at the front
only for about a month, then I was sent to the rear.
Vyshinsky: Why didn't you tell the story at the preliminary
investigation the way you are telling it now?
Arnold: You see, it's very hard for me to remember, 'because
I have had so many adventures in my life.
.
Vyshinsky: Let us take the points in their proper order. Did
you go to Finland before 1913?
Arnold: Why, at the preliminary investigation I . . . .
Vyshinsky: No, answer the question. Did you go to Finland in
1913?
A.rnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Under what name?
Arnold: I tO'ld you that Karl Rask was good till 1916.
Vyshinsky: Well, at the preliminary investigation on September 13 you said that you went abroad for t!he second time under
the name of Aimo Kulpenen-\Vas that so?
Arnold: H's very hard to recollect.
Vyshinsky: When were you telling the truth? At the preliminary investigation or now?
Arnold: Now it has aJI come baok to me.
Vyshinsky: You undertook to recall things and mixed up everything. What guarantee is there that you are telling the truth
now? Further, you said something altogether different at the examination at the Procurator's Office of the U.S.S.R. You said that
your name was Ivanov, which was your mother's name and that
you were given the name of Vasilyev, which was your godfather's
name; that tallies, but how about your mother's name~
Arnold: I did not adopt my mother's name. But my mother
bore that name.
Vyshinsky: Next, the birth certificate was in the name of
Ivanov?
807

Arnold: No, it read-the son of a soldier's daughter, Ivanov.
Vyshinsky: That means you are Ivanov.
Arnold: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: Further, before the revolution . . . when was our
revolution?
Arnold: 1n 1917.
Vyshinsky: You said at the investigation that before the revolution you had been a vagabond. Is that true?
Arnold: It's true and one can feel thi!$ from my biography.
Vyshinsky: Further, you said that you joined the 13th Smerian
regiment and that you served in it.· Did you say that?
Arnold: I was telling you that I was sent to the neighbourhood
of Riga, but you didn't let me finish. I served. there in the 13th
Siberian regiment.
Vyshinsky: And you deserted from the 13th Siberian regiment?
Arnold: It was not the 13th Siberian regiment that I deser.ted
from.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen were you in the 13th Siberian regiment,
before or after your arrest?
Arnold: After. Defore my arrest I was not in the 13th Siberian
regiment. You may have made a mistak~.
Vyshinsky: Of course it's not much use quoting now what
you yourself read and signed.
·
Arnold: I signed it thinking that you had the story straight.
Vyshinsky: That means that I am to blame for this mixup.
Arnold: You have made a !llistake. I said that in Leningrad
I ~as at the Alexander III barracks.
- - ___
Vyshinsky: Your testimony tells a different story.
Arnold: Rea.d it, please.
·
Vyshinsky: Very w-ell, I shall read it once more: "In 1915 l
joined the army. I served in the 13th Siberian regiment. The reg2'
imental commander's name was Ivanov.. · .."
·
Arnold: It doesn't say that this was the first time I deserted.
Why, I deserted hvice.
Vyshinsky: No, this isn't mentioned here.
Arnold: Well, now I'm adding it.
Vyshinsky: Just as I said; now we're getting additions.
Arnold: The first fi.me, I was sent to the Alexander barracks.
Vyshinsky: And what did they do to you?
Arnold: As a recruit they put me through all sorts of exercises.
·Before my training was completed I ran off to Finland. I was
caught and sent back to the Alexander barracks. AfMr I was
caught, I was assigned to the remand squad, pending trial.
308

Vyshinsky: They sentenced you. . . ?
Arnold: They sentenced me and sent me to the 13th Siberian
regiment with a company of reinforcements.
Vyshinsky: Now, that is not what you told us. Did you reach
the regiment?
A.rnold: I did.
Vyshinsky: The name of the regimental commander was
Ivanov?
Arnold: That's right, Ivanov.
Vyshinsky: And the name of the company commander was
Vasilyev?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: But you wrote: "I don't remember the name of
the company commander."
Arnold: I told you afterwards, but you forgot.
Vyshinsky: No, accused Arn9ld, you are not !>uch a simpleton
as you pretend to be. You know how to submit statements rectifying the errors committed by accused persons. You submitted a
statement to the court saying that the name Arnoldov is mentioned here and asking that it be made clear that you are not
Arnoldov, but Arnold.
So you don't remember the name of the company commander.
Or have you recollected it?
Arnold: First I <lid not remember and th~n I did recollect it.
1 said it at the time and you even expressed surprise: "Also Vasilyev?" you asked. And I answered: "Yes."
Vyshinsky: And who was ihe sergeant?
Arnold: I don't remember ..
Vyshinsky: Strange. Of all people, one is more likely to remember his sergeant than his company commander.
"That happened tthen? Did you serve in the regiment?
Arnold: I did.
Vyshinsky: At the front?
Arnold: At the front.
Vyshinsky: And then?
Arnold: And then they sent me to the rear.
Vyshinsky: How long were you at the front?
Arnold·: A month or two. I don't remember exactly.
Vyshinskq: Do you remember the exact place where you were?
Arnold: In the neighbourhood of Stotsmanshof.
Vyshinskq: Was it close to the front?
Arnold: Yes, the front line ran right there, ·along the river.
Vyshinsky: \Vas there any fighting where you were? Was
there any firing?
Arnold: There was.
309

Vyshinsky: Did you take part in the firing?
Arnold: I did.
Vyshinsky: Did you take par·t in the fighting?
Arnold: I did not go into bayonet charges, but I did take part in
the firing .
. . Vysliinsky: Why did you say at the investigation that you
did not take part in the fighti:ng't
Arnold: Because l caH it fighting when you go into a bayonet
charge.
Vyshinsky: .Just why is 1't fighting if there is a bayonet charge.
but if you dc·n't charge, but take part in tiring, that isn't fighting?
In short, when were you telling the truth: now or then?
Arnold: Both then and now. At first I said i!hat I didn't take
part in the fighting, as I didn't go into bayonet charges, but when
you explained to me that firing is also fighting, then I said that in
that case I did take part in fighting.
Vyshinsky: That means you did take part?
Arnold: It means I did.
Vys.hinsky: All right, then. You were sent to the hospital. What
year was that?
Arnold: That was in 1915, the end of 1915.
Vyshinsky: What name were you going under at the time?
Arnold: It was even the beginning of 1916.
Vyshinsky. Under what name?
Arnold: Under the name of Vasilyev.
Vyshinsky: And why did you say at the investigation that in
1916 you went to work under the name of Kulpenen? ~
Arnold: Why, I'm still in the army now, I haven't" arrived--yet,
wait a bit, when I arrive, my naJllle will no longer be VasHyev, but
Kulpenen.
·
Vyshinsky: I am asking you what your name was in ~916.
Now you -say VasHyev. \Vhy_ did you state at the investigatione
that at the end of 1916 you went to work under the name of
Kulpenen?
Arnold: That's right. At the beginning of 1916 I was still in the
army and ·went by the name- of Vasilyev, but al the end o.f 1916
I went to work under the name of Kulpenen.
Vyshinsky: That means that at the end of 1916 you went by
the name of Kulpenen?
- ·- - ·
Arnold: No, you had better take up everything in proper order.
You skip things and aeave :unfilled gaps.
The President: Accused Arnold, I call you to order. Answer the
·questions of Citizen the Procurator as he puts them to you.
Arnold: I am doing so, but Citizen the Procurator hi~self skips
over things. . . .
310

The President: I must again explain to you that the Procurator
puts the questions and you must be good enough to answer them
in the same order in which he puts them.
Arnold: I will. I beg your pardon.
Vyshinsky: I realize, accused Arnold, that it is certainly in<:onvenient for you when gaps are left. Did you have a differeut
name for every gap?
Arnold: No, but two or three months play a tremendous part
in my life.
Vyshinsky: You would prefer me to put questions in such an
order as to leave no gaps in your biography?
Arnold: You had better conduct the examination the way you
like. Excuse me for having disturbed you.
Vyshinsky: So then, what do we find out, at last? In 1915
you got to the front under the name of Vasilyev. How many
months were you there? A couple of months?
Arnold: That's about right, a few months.
Vyshinsky: Did you fall sick or desert?
Arnold: No, first I took sick and was sent to a field hospital.
After that they transferred me to Pereyaslav-Zalessky to a hospital; and from the hospital I landed in Nizhni-Novgorod. I wa'i
there for two weeks, then they began recruiting for the Lettish
battalion. I expressed a desire to join and was transferred to the
Letti.sh battalion at the city of Yuriev.
Vyshinsky: Why did you join the Lettish battalion? Are you
a Lett?
Arnold: Because I intended to run .away from the army again
and therefore I moved nearer to St. Petersburg.
Vyshinsky: Why did YOll.l have to join the Letti.sh battalion for
this? You could have gone to Leningrad on your own. You went
-to Nizhni-Novgorod on yoUJr own?
Arnold: No, I was transferred there.
Vyshinsky: In what capacity were you transferred?
Arnold: I had a note from the hospital.
Vyshinsky: To whom was fthe note addressed? By whom and
to whom?
Arnold: I no longer remember; to a barracks somewhere.
Vyshinsky: And so you arrived in the barracks. ·
Arnold: Yes.
·
Vyshinsky: That means YO'll were in the army?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You came there as a soldier?
Arnold: Yes, even as a corporal.
Vyshinsky: But when did you manage to become a corporal?
Arnold: I sewed on the stripes while on the way.
311

Vyshinsky: That means that you made yourself a oorporal?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vhy didn't you promote yourself to a higher
rank?
Arnold: I was afraid I -couldn't manage a higher rank.
Vyshinsky: But did you manage the rank of corporal?
Arnold: I did.
Vyshinsky: How did you manage it?
A.rnold: I went to Nizhni-Novgorod, and when I recovered.
they detailed me, or rather they didn't detail me, but asked wh<>
wanted to join the Lettish battalion .. I expressed a desire and went.
Vyshinsky: So y01U went?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: With whiat rank did you go-·as a corporal?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: The documents state that.
Arnold: Yes, it was written there that I was a corporal.
Vyshinsky: That is, you forged the documents.
Arnold: Yes, of course.
Vyshinslcy: Consequently, with false documents you enterect
the Letti.sh battalion as a corporal?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Where did that Lettish battalion go?
Arnold: The 2nd Lettish battalion was transferred to the town
of Yuriev and here I was detailed to the drill squad and drilled
recruits.
Vyshinsky: How could you train others? What did YOJI, know
yoursetf?
·
,,...._
Arnold: What you've read or learned sticks in your ear.
Vyshinsky: How did you come to know anything? \Veren't you
in hospitals or on the run most of the time?
Arnold: Yes, but what you see and hear, you remember. All
that I am saying is the sincerest truth.
Vyshinsky: I cannot believe that you, having been sick and
in the hos·pital, turn up in the battalion, and are suddenly assigned
to train recruits; or were you able to manreuvre somehow, to
throw dust in people's eyes?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Hence,· you were not training recruits, .but pre-_
tending to do so?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen was that, and where?
Arnold: This was at the end of 1915, or the beginning orf 1916.
Vysliinsky: As every month is precious to you, tell me when
and how it happened, otherwise you will blame me again.
312

Arnold: It was at the end of 1915, approximately in November
or December.
Vyshinsky: Where were you with that rifle battalion?
A.rnold: In the town of Yuriev.
Vyshinsky: At the end of 1915, approximately in OctoberNovember?
Arnold: Yes, in November-December, 1916. Sorry. 1915. Here
I sen'ed until the beginning of 1916.
Vyshinsky: What happened to you after that?
Arnold: After that, in August, I got leave of absence and went
to Finland.
l'yshinsky: \Vhy then did you make wrong statements at the
preliminary investigation, to me at the Office of the Procurator of the Union, and at the People's Commissariat of Internal
Affairs? You confirmed that in October-November 1915 you were
in Yuriev, in the Lettish Rifle Battalion, served until the begimling
of 1916, and then went to Finland?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And where did you go from Finland?
A.rnold: Here I changed my name lo Ai.mo Kulpenen and went
to ~finsk.
Yyshinsky: Why did you at the preliminary investigation
write: "I must add" (you even thought it necessary to add) "that
already in 1915 I deserted the Finland Regiment, but was caught
and court-martialed."?
Arnold: That was a mistake.
Vyshinsky: Another mistake? You have got yourself mixed up.
Arnold: It is hard to place each month.
Vyshinsky: You yourself recalled that in 1915 you joined the
rifle battalion, were there until 1916, then went to Finland,
changed your passport for a new one in the name of Ku'lpenen
and went away; but here you write: "In 1915 I deserted the n~gi­
ment, was caught and court-martialed."?
Arnold: That was at the beginnng of the year. It works out
that way.
Vyshinsky: You said that at the beginning of the year you were
in Nizhni, there you signed up in the rifle battalion, that you made
yourself a corporal, ·then went to Yuriev. That is what happened
at the beginning of the year. You are muddling things. And so, you
adopted the new name of Aimo Kulpenen?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How did you get the passp-ort?
Arnold: I knew that comrade well.
/'
Vyshinsky: Well, and what of it?
313

A.mold: I went to the parish office, presented a certificate and
said that I wanted a birth certificate.
Vyshinsky: With his consent?
A.mold: He did not know.
Vyshinsky: So, when you said that you had obtained the birth
certificate ·by fraudulent means, it was true?
Arnold: i can't see what fraud has got to do with it. He reported
me when I deserted the army and I thought that if I used his
passport it would not be too high a compensation.
Vyshinsky: You took his passport by fraudulent means?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Took revenge on ·him?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Indd:entally, that wa·s to your advantage?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And where did you go with this passport?
Arnold: To lVIinsk, as an interpreter. Then I was a clerk in the
Statistical Section, and then I went to Vladivostok.
Vyshinsky: Well, and how did you get to Vladivostok?
Arnold: With an army railway pass.
Vyshinsky: Where did you get it?
Arnold: At the Headquarters of the 'Vestern Front; I appropriated several of them.
Vyshinsky: You stole them?
Arnold: Yes. In Vladivostok I signed up as a stoker on the ·s.s.
"Tula." I worked on the Kamchatka-Japan trip and back to Vladivostok. Then I went from Vladivostok to Ar~hange~
Vyshinsky: No.
~--..
Arnold: I wanted to go to Leningrad, ibut landed in Archangel.
Vyshinsky: That means, from Vladivostok you went to Leningrad, and from Leningrad you went to Archangel?
Arnold: That's right.
i
Vyshinsky: Tell us, what year was that?
Arnold: 1917, August.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat government was there then?
Arnold: I did not know what government it was; I did not
understand which was which.
Vyshinsk1J: How is that? The revolution h?.d ta}\,~n .P1~ce, and
you -did not know. Were they Whites or Reds?
-Arnold: A \Vhite government.
Vyshinsky: So you did understand?
Arnold: They walked about in tsarist uniforms, I couldn't help
understanding.
/'
Vyshinsky: Hence it was a White government?
314

Arnold: Yes.
.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat did you do next?
Arnold: I .signed up on an American ship. Arrived m New
York.
Vyshinsky: Under what .name?
Arnold: Aimo Kulpenen.
Vyshinsky: What did you start doing in. Ke\v York?
Arnold: I was in New York a few <lays and then joined the
army. 111e American army.
Vyshinsky: \Vhy?
Arnold: I was recruited.
Vyshinsky: What do you mean, recruited? You, a Russian subject?
Arnold: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: But you did not understand those things?
Arnold: I did not understand, a comrade understood. We found
ourselves on 20th Street, they ·gave us a n!ght's lodging, and it
turned out that it was an Army and Navy Home. There they
recruited us.
l'yshinsky: In what capacity?
Arnold: As a raw recruit.
Vyshinsky: You were not a corporal there?
.4rnold: No, I could not speak English.
Vyshinsky: How long were you in the American army?
Arnold: Altogether, the first time, one year, and then I was
discharged.
Vyshinsky: We will get to "then" later. You arrived in the
beginning of 1918?
Arnold: At the end of 1917.
Vyshinsky: At the end of 1917 you arrived in Kew York and
got into the American army?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How long were you in it?
A.mold: Exactly a year.
Vyshinsky: Until the end of 1918?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Under what name?
Arnold: Aimo Kulpenen. As soon as we were taken into the army
we were naturalized, made American citizens.
Vyshinsky: Against your wishes?
Arnold: With my consent.
Vyshinsky: \Vith your consent?
Arnold: Why not? Since I was in the army~ In every army a
soldier must be a subject of that country.
Vyshinsky: With your consent, or without your consent?
315

Arnold: With my consent. And then I changed my name to
Valentine Arnold.
Vyshinsky: Why?
Arnold: When I filled out my citizenship papers I asked them
to change my name from Aimo Kulpenen to Valentine Arnold.
Vyshinsky: That is when you became Arnold?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In order to appear like an American?
Arnold: Yes, because two persons cannot have the same ~ame.
Vyshinsky: Whose name?
Arnold: Well, Kulpenen was still in Finland, wasn't he?
Vyshinsky: Did you serve a sentence in prison there?
Arnold: I did.
Vyshinsky: How long?
Arnold: Five or s>ix moniths.
Vyshinsky: Why?
Arnold: I was SUSRected of appropriating government property.
Vyshinsky: Hence, as soon as you arrived in America, you
were at once taken into the army. Is that so?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And then from the· army you landed in prison?
Arnold: No, it was in 1922 that I landed in prison.
Vyshinsky: A second time? I am asking you about the first
time.
Arnold: N'o, I was not in prison the first time.
· Vyshinsky: You were not in prison the first time? oi'"Arnold: No.
Vyshinsky: You served in the army for a year, and then \vhere
did you go?
Arnold: I was demobilized and I wanted to return to Finland.
Vyshinsky: With \Yhat passport?
·
Arnold: I did not yet have a passport in the name of Arnolcf
because I was to have gotten that later.
Vyshinsky: How was that, you said that you were given papers
in the name of Arnold?
Arnold: I got my citizenship papers in 1918.
Vysliinsky: Did you have papers in the name of ;\.rnold? .
Arnold: No, not yet. I received the first papers in me-name ofArnold at the time--I don't know whether there is a document in
the records, there is some correspondence dealing with the time
I was in the American army the second time, only that was four
years later.
/'
·
Vyshinsky: I am asking you about the first time. The first time
316

you joined the army at the end of 1915 under the name of Aimo
Kulpenen and served until the end of 1918?
Arnold: Until the beginning of 1919.
Vyshinsky: Even until the beginning of 1919? Under the name
of Aimo Kulpenen?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: At that time you adopted the name of Arnold?
Arnold: I had already changed my name then, but I had not
received my papers.
Vyshinsky: You were demobilized in the beginning of 1919 and
you went to Finland. Is that right, or not?
Arnold: No, I did not go to Finland, I wanted to go.
Vyshinsky: With what passport?
Arnold: In the name of Aimo Kulpenen.
Vyshinsky: Thus you had a passport in the name of Aimo
··Kulpenen?
Arnold: Yes. I had kept the old passport.
Vyshinsky: Had you adopted the new name of Arnold?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And kept the old passport for any contingency?
Arnold: I kept the old one for any contingency.
Vyshinsky: Did you get to Finland?
Arnold: I did not get to Finland, but to South America.
Vyshinsky: How did you get there, by accident?
Arnold: I signed up as a sailor on the sailing boat "Viscount"
and got to South America, Buenos Aires. Then I signed up on an
American ship and went to Scotland; from there, in January 1920
to New York, and there I again landed in the army.
Vyshinsky: How is that, you landed in the army again?
..Arnold: While I was away my citizenship papers were made
out in the name of Arnold, and when I arrived I got my papers
and citizenship.
Vyshinsky: Hence, while you were travelling your papers were
being made out, and when you arrived they were ready for you,
and you received them. Is that how it was?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you serve a sentence in prison there?
Arnold: Twice.
Vyshinsky: How many years did you serve in the army?
Arnold: From 1920 to 1923. Then I went to Los Angeles, in
California.
Vyshinsky: How is it that you were serving in tpe army and
. were in prison?
317

A.rnold: I was in the army and was in prison six months. I
was serving in the army and was in prison.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen were you in prison the second time?
Arnold: I was not in prison the second time, I was a Commandant.
- Vyshinsky: But you said just now that you served prison sentences twice?
Arnold: No, you are mistaken, I was in prison only once.
Vyshinsky: In the first plaoe, you said this during the preliminary investigation.
Arnold: During the preliminary investigation I also said that
I had served a prison sentence once.
Vyshinsky: \Vere you shown your Party file? You were a
member of the Party, were you not?
Arnold: I deceived the Party.
Vyshinsky: But at the investigation you also said that you had
served prison sentences twice.
Arnold: At the investigation I did not say what I am saying
here.
Vyshinsky: As far as I could understand you, you said here
that you had served prison sentences twice.
Arnold: But the first time was in Russia, and the second time
in America.
Vyshinsky: So it is twice, after all: once in America for appropriating other people's property, and the second time in Russia-what for?
Arnold: For desertion. I was in the remand squad, in Fontanka, No. 80.
--Vyshinsky: But there was no such unit. \.Vhat was this remand
<;quad?

Arnold: I was under arrest and I thought it was the remand
squad.
f
Vyshinsky: But didn't you state in an official document that
you had been arrested in Minsk?
Arnold: Oh, that was a lie.
Vyshinsky: It's all lies with you, so that even you cannot tell
whether you are lying or telling the truth. Hence, in 1923 you
again returned from America to Europe?
-·-- ·- _.
Arnoid: In 1923 I was ·in Los Angeles, I made application to
join a society that was called Technical Aid Society to Soviet Russia. My application was accepted and I was sent to Siberia in the
second industrial group ....
Vysliinsky: So you were in the American army from the end of
1917 or the end of 1918.
318

Arnold: Four years altogether.
Vyshinsky: No, wait, we can't have "altogether." That won't
do. At the end of 1917 to the end of 1918 or the beginning of 1919
you ,..,.ere in the American army. Is that right?
Arnold: That's right. Then from 1919 to 1920 I was discharged.
Vyshinsky: Did you take part in the fighting anywhere?
Arnold: No.
·
T/yshinsky: \Vhen you were in America did you do any fighting anywhere?
Arnold: No. In France I was ....
Vyshinsky: Where does France come in? You said that from
the end of 1917 to the beginning of 1919 you were in the American
army, then you were demobilized, then you went to Helsingfors,
or wanted to, but did not get there. Instead of that, where did
you go?
Arnold: To South America.
Vyshinsl.:y: You were there eight months. Then in 1920, where
did you go?
Arnold: Back to America.
Vyshinsky: And, you say, you were there three years: 1921,
1922, and 1923?
Arnold: That's right.
Vyshinsky: And where does France come in?
Arnold: But you did not ::isk me what I was doing <luring that
year, and so I didn't tell you.
'Vyshinsky: No, I did ask you: were you in America? You
said: "Yes." You said that you were in America in 1920, were in
America in 1921, were in America in 1922 and in 1923. Is that
right?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: But where does France come in? France is not
America? Arnold: No.
Vyshinsky: W11en did you go to France?
.4rnold: In 1917 or 1918. I was in the American army.
Vyshinsky: Accused Arnold, you would try even the greatest
patience, the patience of an ox. I am not losing patience yet. You
may deny what you said at the preliminary investigation on January 9, and what you said at the preliminary investigation in
September, but you will not get away from what you said only
five minutes ago.
Arnold: You did not understand me.
Vyshinsky: I asked you: while in America from the end of
319

1917 to the end of 1918 or the beginning of 1919, did you do any
fighting? \Vhat was your answer?
- Arnold: You did not ask me whether I did any fighting. I did
not understand you. Between 1917 and 1918 I was in France,
but not for long, four months.
· Vyshinsky: Hence, you were in America, but during that period
you were sent to France?
Arnold: Yes. Vyshinsky: With any unit?
Arnold: I was sent to reinforce the Ninth Field Artillery.
Vyshinsky: To the front? ·
Arnold: I never got to -the front.
Vyshinsky: Hence, you did not take part in any fighting?
Arnold: No.
Vyshinsky: Then why did you write that you were wounded
in the leg by a shell splinter at Verdun?
Arnold: That was when I was being sent to the front, I did
not manage. . . .
Vyshinsky: But Verdun was the front?
Arnold: I consider the front when you are already on the positions.
Vyshinsky: But Verdun was the front, was it not?
Arnold. It was.
Vyshinsky: Were you wounded at Verdun?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: By a shell splinter?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Where did the splinter come from?
A.mold: A bomb was dropped from an aeroplane and I-was
wounded by shrapnel.
Vyshinsky: Yet you say you were not at the front? _
Arnold: Maybe I cannot distinguish between what is a front
and what is not a front.
#
Then I got acquainted with some Russian comrades who
belonged to the Technical Aid Society to Soviet Russia, which I
had joined, and decided ito g<:> to Russia.
Vyshinsky: That is, you also decided to giv-e technical aid to
Soviet Russia?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What aid did you give?
Arnold: I came to Kemerovo.
Vyshinsky: w·ith what doc~rnent?
Arnold: A letter of recommendation written in English.
Vyshinsky: \Vho gave it to you?
Arnold: The Technical Aid Society to Soviet Russia.
320

Vyshinsky: And how did they know you wanted to help
Russia?
Arnold: I made an application and filled out questionnaires.
Vyshinslfy: Yes. That you know how to do. What did you write
in the questionnaires?
Arnold: I wrote where I was horn, my name and so on.
Vyshinsky: What, did you mention all your names?
Arnold: No, by that time I had only one name---Arnold. Since
I joined the American army my name was Arnold.
Vyshinsky: And where was the passport in the name of Kulpenen?
Arnold: I kept it, as an old document.
Vyshinsky: You kept it all the same?
Arnold: I kept it, well, as a museum piece.
Vyshinsky: So you think museums will be interested in your
pas3µort?
Arnold: I kept it as a souvenir, because it contains seals from
all over the world.
·
Vyshinsky: Well, to go on, you .say you came to Kemerovo.
Were you :a member of this Techniool Aid Society to Soviet
Russia?
Arnold: I was not a member, but only handed in an application. Genera'lly speaking, when I came to Kemerovo I was a member of this colonist's ol'lganization.
Vyshinsky: What was your religion at that time?
Arnold: I was a Lutheran.
Vyshinsky: Were you never a member of a masonic lodge?
Arnold: I was.
Vyshinsky: How did you manage to get into a masonic lo<lge?
Arnold: That was when I was in America; I made an application and joined a masonic lodge.
· Vyshinsky: Why a masonic lodge, and not somet'hing else?
Arnold: I wante'd to get into higher society.
Vyshinsky: Did you get into the Technical Aid ·society to
Soviet R'USsia while you were still a freemason? Did the masonic
lodge help yoo. to get into this society?
Arnold: No.
Vyshinsky: And wihen you joined this society, did you say
that you were a freemason? ·
Arnold: No, I kept it seeret.
Vyshinsky: You kept it secret?
Arnold: Yes, and until I was arrested nobody knew about it.
Vyshinsky: \Vhy?
Arnold: Because I did not need it any more.
Vyshinsky: And when was it needed?
321

Arnold: It was needed then. In America it was needed but in
Soviet Russia it was not needed.
Vyshinsky: I am speaking about America. Did you tell your
acquaintances in America that you were a member of a masonic
lodge?
Arnold: My acquaintances knew that I was a freemason.
Vyshinsky: Did you attend religious meetings, masonic meetings in America? _
Arnold: ·when I was in America I attended meetings, and later
masonic lodges.
Vyshinsky: And did you perform aH the masonic rites?
Arnold: I performed what was required.
Vyshinsky: And when you joined the Technical Aid Society
did they know about this?
Arnold: I .said that I was not a member of any masonic organization, that I did not attend! a lodge, and when I joined the
Technical Aid Society I did not say I was a freemason.
Vyshinsky: You concealed the fact?
Arnold: I did not exactly conceal it, but nobody asked me
about it.
Vyshinsky: In a word, the freemasons did not help you in this
matter?
Arnold: No, I got on without them.
Vyshinsky: You came to Kemerovo? And who sent you there
from Los Angeles?
Arnold: I was sent as a colonist.
· Vyshinskg: What does that mean, as a colonis_1?
Arnold: Because they were sending a group oT: Am_!.!J.can specialis~.
·
.
Vyshinsky: That is, you toa" came to the colony which was in
Kemerovo?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you were accepted as a member?
i
Ar.nold: ·Yes, that is to say, I was accepted as a member
while I was still in America, otherwise they could not have sent
me.
l'yshinsky: 'Vhen was that?
Arnold: That was in October 1923.
Vyshinsky: How long were you in the A.I.C.J__ _ _... __
Arnold: AU the time the A.LC. ex.isted. Until 1926, I was only
in the Kuzbas.
Vyshinsky: And where did you work?
Arnold: I worked in Kemerovo.
Vyshinsky: On [What job?
Arnold: On various johs: I worked as translator, office mana322

ger, and in the commercial deparlment. If it is necessary to enumerate all, I can.
l'yshinsky: Did you join the Communist Party of the Sovi<!t
Union when you came from America?
Arnold: I joined the Party in 1923.
Vyshinsky: And at that time you were still a freemason?
Arnold: Yes, but I told nobody about it.
Vyshinsky: That is, you wormed your way into the Party and
concealed the fact that you were a freemason?
Arnold: I considered that I had automatically ceased to be a
freemason. Since I was not attendiI11g and not paying <lues I had"
automatically lapsed.
Vyshinsky: But when you joined the Party you concealed the
fact?
Arnold: Yes, I did.
Vyshinsky: And then it was discovered?
Arnold: Yes, it was.
Vyshinsky: What was discovered?
Arnold: It was discovered during the search.
Vyshinsky: And what did the search disclose?
Arnold: There was a small caird which showed that I had been
a member of a masonic society.
Vyshinsky: And what happened to you next?
·Arnold: I wa:s .questioned and I said that I had been a freemason.
Vyshinsky: Well, and what next?
Arnold: And now I am answering for it.
Vyshinsky: Accused Arnold, you are not being tried for freemasonry, and you have no business to say that. Tell us, what
lodge did you belong to?
· Arnold: To the third lodge, third degree, third stage.
Vyshinsky: How was it called?
Arnold: In English or in Russian?
Vyshinsky: No, you had better say it in Russian so that I and
everybody in Cour.t may understand.
· Arnold: The Ancient Order of Free !\fasons, the Ancient Free
Order, and that I was a Master Mason of such and such a lodge.
Vyshinsky: What lodge?
Arnold: No. 183.
i: Vyshinsky: Very well. You were not called to account by the
f Party in this connection?
.
Y,[ · -Arnold: I passed through three purges.
·. Vyshinsky: Successfully?
;.:· Arnold: Successfully. I managed to keep it dark, only I mixed
pp my biography.

~

~

t

3~

Vyshinsky: And \Vas there not an occasion when for anti-Soviet
agitation ... ?
Arnold: Tiiat was in Kuznetsk in 1930.
Vysliinsky: \Vere you called to account or expelled from the
Party?
Arnold: I was near to being expelled. I was removed from my
job.
Vyshinsky: What for?
Arnold: It was said in the Control Commission that there were
rumours that Arnold was carrying. on anti-Soviet propaganda
among the foreign specialists. I was expelled from the Party for
this.
Vyshinsky: And did you really carry on propaganda?
Arnold: And at the same time it was said that I belonged to an
organization a1ien to the Party-the freernasons-but I managed
to get out of this.
Vyshinsky: You are a fairly resourceful man in that respect?
Arnold: Resourcefulness does not always help.
·
Vyshinsky: Whom, you? I ask you, are you a resourceful man?
Arnold: Yes.
·
Vyshinsky: Did it help you?
Arnold: It did.
Vyshinsky: Were you connected with the Communist Party in
America?
Arnold: I was, I took part in the work of the Communist Party
in 1919.
Vyshinsky: And in the masonic lodge?
'":
Arnold: I was at the same time a member of the masonic..J.edge.
Vyslrinsky: Perhaps the Communist Party helped you to get
into the. Technical Aid Society to Russia?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is, you used your connections along t~js
line too?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: The frecmasons did not help you? And W'hail: were
you reailly by conviction, a freemason or a Communist?
Arnold: I was just a man.
Vyshinsky: There are various kinds of men. \Vere you a Communist at the time?
Arnold: I was according lo the documents, but I was also a
freemason.
Vyshinsky: And according to the documents you were also a
corporal.
Arnold: No, I was a sergeant.
324

Vyshinsky: That was later. I ask you, were you a Communist
in reality, by conviction and in views?
Arnold: By conviction I was and I was not.
Vyshinsky: And were you a freemason by conviction?
Arnold: No.
Vyshinsky: That is, you were never one by conviction?
Arnold: No. lf the freemasons had known .that I was a Russian
and not a Lutheran, they would never have accepted me.
Vyshinsky: And are you really a Lutheran?
Arnold: I belonged to the Orthodox Church.
Vyshinsky: Why then do you regard yourself as a Lutheran?
Arnold: There are Roman Catholics, and Gre~k Catho'.lks, the
Lutherans are something else.
Vyshinsky:. They are neither Greek Catholic mar Roman
Catholic.
Arnold: At any rate, you understand that the Russian religion
.
is somethiing quite <l.iffierent from Lutheranism.
Vyshinsky: That's so. But you were not regarded as a Lutheran?
Arnold: No. As a matler of fact I was -christened in the Russian
Church.
Vyshinsky: Yet you joined the freemasons as a Lutheran?
Arnold: Yes. .
Vyshinsky: That you understand very well. And if you
had said that you were Russian they would not have accepted
you?
Arnold: No.
Vyshinsky: Why?
Arnold: Because it is against the religion of the Catholics.
Vyshinsky: But not against Protestantism?
Arnold: No.
Vyshinskg: Do you understand these things well?
Arnold: Yes, excellentlv.
Vyshinsky: You knew ~hat before you joined the freemasons?
Arnold: Yes, I knew it, of course.
Vyshinsky: That is, you had studied the question before?
Arnold: I understood the question very well, because they
question you there as they do.everywhere else.
Vyshinsky: When did you get into touch with the Trotskyites?
Arnold: In 1932.
Vyshinsky: With whom?
, Arnold: When I worked in Prokp,Pyevsk the manager was
:Shest\w. That was where I first got int0 touch with the Trotskyites.
; Vyshinsky: Who put you in touch with them?
325

Arnold: I was working as manager of the ·garage. TI1e managf!r
was Shestov, and lhat is where I got in touch with them.
Vyshinsky: In 1932?
Arnold: In 1932.
Vyshinsky: Did you discuss any Trotskyite affairs with him?
Arnold: \Vhen I got to know him I would often go to his office,
and he asked me why I was dismissed from the Kuznetsk Combined Works Construction.
Vyshinsky: Why were you dismissed?
Arnold: For anti-Soviet propaganda among foreign specialists.
Vyshinsky: Did he know that?
Arnold: He did. He also knew that I belonged to an organization alien to the Party, to the freemasons. He knew that I was a
Finn, that I had changed my name several times ....
Vyshinsky: He knew that too?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did he know all your names?
Arnold: No, ·he knew only Aimo Kulpenen and Arrtold.
Vyshinsky: Let rus count up how many names you had. Do you
rememher them all?
Arnold: I do.
Vyshinsky: Vasilyev, Rask, Ivanov intervenes, there was a
birth certificate.
Arnold: I was never Ivanov.
Vyshinsky: Then Aimo Kulpenen. Next?
Arnold: Arnold.
Vyshinsky: Is that all?
Arnold: Yes.
---~
Vyshinsky: That is, four names?
Arnold: Four names.
Vyshinsky: And you were first Vasilyev, then Kulpenen, then
again VasHyev, then again Kulpenen, then ArnoLd, then again
Kulpenen?
t
Arnold: It works out that way.
Vyshinsky: Did Shestov know these names?
Arnold: He did not know all, he only knew two names.
Vyshinsky: And when did he let you into his criminal plans,
into his crimes?
Arnold: I would often go into his office. He said: "l_~ottld have
handed you over to the authorities long ago. But I do not want ·to
do so because I think that you will be a good man for our crganization." Then -he said that the orga11ization worked ·very well.
Vyshinsky: \\That does it mean-well?
Arnold: Splendid, in a word, that it was developing, our memhers were already working all over the J{uzbas.
326

l'yshinskg: How were thev working?
Arnold: Performing all sorts of wrecking acts.
Vyshinsky: That is, that their affairs were going splendidly?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And then?
Arnold: And then he told me that they shortly intended to
overthrow the present leadership. (A pause.).
Vyshinsky: And then?
Arnold: And that it was possible that leaders would. also visit
our district, and that it was our chief task to commit terrorist acts
against the leaders of the .government.
Vyshinsky: "Well, and what then?
Arnold: He then told me: "I have been testing you for three
months. I consider you a man of energy and will. Therefore you
have been assigned to perform terrorist ads. I wi'hl put you in
touch with Cherepukhin for this purpose." He put me in touch
with Cherepukhin and said: "Here is a man for the work."
Vyshinsky: For what work?
_
·
Arnold: For the performance of terrorist acts. (A pause.}
Vyshinsky: What next?
Arnold: Then he left. (A pause.)
Vyshinsky: ·why have you .stopped?
Arnold: At that time, it was in 1933. . . . (A pause) Wnat is
it vou want me to relate?
·vyshinsky: The work to which_ Shestov assigned you. Your
present work?
Arnold: In 1934 several leaders of the government visited our
district. I was the manager of the garage and it fell to me to perform terrorist acts.
Vyshinsky: Who instmcted you?
Arnold: Cherepukhin.
Vyshinsky: And who instructed Cherepukhin?
Arnold: Ohere1mkhin was instructed by Shestov.
Vyshinsky: And did you speak to Shestov personally about it?
Arnold: Only later.
Vyshinskg: You did speak to him?
Arnold: I did.
Vgshinskg: ·what acts did you prepare for?
Arnold: I was to1d of two places where to commit the terror-isl
acts: one place was at Pit No. 3, the olher place was at Pit No. 8.
Vysh'insky: \Vell, go on with your story. Wihy have you suddenly lost your voice? When did you organize the terrorist acts?
Arnold: The first terrorist ad was in 1934, at the beginning
of the year, or rather in the spring.
Vy,i;hinsky: Against whom?
327

Arnold: Against Orjonikidzc.
VyshinsJ.:17: What was the nature of it?
Arnold: Its nature was that Cherepukhin <lefiniteily told me:
"Orjonikidze is coming tomorrow. Look here, you must perform
the terrorist act and stop at nothing."
Vyshinsky: ·wen, what then?
'Arnold: I agreed: to the proposal. The next day I drove up in
the car, because, as the manager of the garage, and as ·a member of
the Party, I was above suspicion. I drove to the station. Orjonlkidze, Eiche and Rukhimovich gat in. I dr.ovie them to the German Colony, and !!'hey asked me to drive from there to Tyrkan,
and when we got to the lop of the hill they asked me to stop so
that they could take a look at the whole of Prokopyevsk. We
then stopped at the combined pit, No. 7-8-9. Cherepukhin had
warned me that everything was in readiness there: "You will see
an obstade there and on this obstacle you will cause an accident."
And so, when I descended the hi:ll I went at a great speed, a1bo-µt
70 or 80 kilometres an hour, and I saw an obstacle albout one and
a half kilometres ahead. It flashed illto my head at once that this
was the place where I was to cause the accident. Not knowing
the place, I did not know what would happen to me. . . . So I
slowed down and soon stopped, and then turned on to the bridge
on the left, although I was to have driven straight ahead.
Vyshinsky: You did not dare?
Arnold: I could not do it.
Vyshinsky: You could not do it, you did not dare? That is our
luck. And the seoond case?
_
Arnold: One morning Cherepu'khin came to my office ~nd said:
"Molotov is coming today. Look here, see that you don't muff it
this time." I tdld him that I had not muffed it. He said: "! know
how you did not muff it." I then realized that somebody was keeping an eye on me. I replied that I would <lo it, I drove up to the
dispatch office. I knew the rplace where I was to cause the accil!ent
very well; it was near the rise from Pit No. 3. There is a curve
there. On this curve there is not a guHy, as Shestov called it,
but what we call an embankment, the edge of the road, about 8
or 10 metres deep, a drop of nearly 90°. When I came to the station, Molotov, Kurganov, Secretary of the District Committee of the
Party, and Gryadinsky, Chairma.n of the TerritQ.l:Y _Executive
Committee, got into the car. . . .
-~
I w.ms told to <lrive to the workers' residential quarter through
Komsomolskaya Street. I did so. Just as I wa5 leaving the dirt road
for the highroad, a ·car suddenly came dashing towards me. There
was no time to think; I had to commit a terrorist act. I see that
the other car is flying towards me. Then I realized that Chere328

pukhin had not trusted me and had sent a second car. I had not
much time to think, but I got scared. I managed ro turn to the
sKle. into the gully. At that moment Gryadinsky seized me and
said: "What are you doing?"
Vyshinsky: What st~pped you?
Arnold: Cowardice stopped me.
.
Vyshinsky: And this thwarted your criminal plans?
Arnold: Yes.
Vyshinsky: I have a question to ask Sheslov. Accused Shestov,
do you confirm Arnold's testimony regarding the preparations
and the attempt on the life of Comrade Molotov?
Shestov: Yes, in the main that is what Cherepukhin told me.
Vyshinsky: On whose instructions was it organized?
Shestov: It was ovganized <>n my instructions.
Vyshinsky: On your instructions?
Shestov: Yes.
lTyshinsky: Through Cherepukhin?

Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And did you speak to Arnold personally ·before this
incident?
Shestov: No, I was at that time working at the AnzheroSujensk mine, and therefore Cherepukhin was in charge of all
fue practical work.
Vyshinsky: The practica'l work?
Shestov: Yes, the murder.
Vyshinsky: Cherepukhin was 1n charge?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And did you learn about this act from Arnold after
it was over?
Shestov: Yes, it was not until the autumn that he told me about
it, at the end of 1934.
Vyshinsky: And under what circumstances did he tell you
about it?
Shestov: He came to work at the Anzhero-Sujensk mine.
Vyshinsky: Well, and what of it, why should he tell you
about it?
Shestov: I wanted to know how it happened.
Vyshinsky: Did he know that it was done on your instructions?
Shestov: I wanted to know about the matter from the point of
view of the technique, why and how.
Vyshinsky: You wanted to know?
Shestov.: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is, you asked him?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And he explained?

329

Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And did you give him instructions to organize an
attempt on the lifo of Comrade Molotov?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: On whose ·instructions 9
Shestov: I had received the directives from Muralov.
Vyshinsky: From Muralov?
Shestov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: May I put a question to the accused Muralov?
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky: Muralov, I must verify the testimony on this point
once more. Do you admit that you gave instructions to Shestov
to organize an attempt on the life of Comrade Molotov?
Muralov: I have already testified that I confirm this.
Vyshinsky: Please understand that I aru questioning you in
connection with the examination o.f the accused Arnold. Shestov
gave him instructio:ns to organize an attempt on the life of Comrade Molotov. In his turn, Shestov refers to you, and I must
verify it.
Muralov: I admit, I confirm it.
The President: Counsel for Defence, Comrade Kaznatcheyev.
Kaznacheyev (to Arnold) : P.lease tell us more precisely how
long you belonged to the Trotskyite organization?
Arnold: From 1932 to 1934.
Kaznacheyev: From 1932 to 1934?
Arnold: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: During that time what orders did you carry
out? vVere they these two attempts to commit terroflst acts?
Arnold: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: \Vhat other orders?
Arnold: I did not receive any other orders.
Kaznacheyev: Did you receive orders to recruit peop:le?
Arnold: Yes, that's true, I did. I quite forgot about it. Ci\!i,zen
Procurator, may I tell abom this briefly? .
Vyshinsky: You may.
Arnold: \Vhile I was working in Prokopyevsk, I was ordered
by Shestov to find reliable people to work in the garage, that is,
chauffeurs. I agreed to this. But I did not engage in this recruiting
work. It is true that I took on people, but they were mostly specialists. I took on the foreign speciaJists. But I di.d ·not · fe'll' ~him
(Shestov) about this. I took on these men for the repair shop so
as to improve the quality of the repairs. vVhen he asked me,
"Have you found the people we need?" I said that I had. He said:.
"W~en necessa~y I will ,~ell you, and rvhen nece~sary you will put1
me m touch with them. · But as he went away, th~s did not happen.~
330

4

Kaznacheyev: That is, one may conclude that you were instructed to undertake recruiting, but you took on two employees whom
you did not bring into the organization. Consequently, you deceived the person who gave you these instructions. \Vhen you committed the terrorist attempt, did you also in both cases deceive, or
attempt to deceive? The second incident happened in such a way,
as the saying is: he came-and funked it. That.is what Cherepukhin
said.
Did you talk to Shestov very soon after this act was committed?
Arnold.: Very shortly after this act was committed I was
summoned to the Regional Committee of the Party. Here my
case was discussed, and I was given a reprimand for negligent
driving. I tried to get away from this place as soon as possible.
Before that I had sent an application to the People's Commissariat
of Heavy Industry to be assigned to work in one of the districts of
European Russia. The CornmiSisariat replied, "We can offer you
work, report immediately." I reported at the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry about the end of Septemlber and they
appointed me to Tashikent, where I arrived and requested permission to go to fetch my family. But as I did not Hke it there,
I went to Novosibirsk and met Shestov in the Kuzbas and asked
him whether he had any kind of work for me, because I did
not like it there. He said that there was work and proposed that I
should temporarily take the job of assistant manaiger of the supply
deparhnent and that he would afterwards put me into the garage.
I put off my departure for Tashkent and went to Anzherka. At
first I was assistant manager of the supply department and then
I was appointed manager of the garage, which was the last job I
held.
· Kaznacheyev: \Vhen you were instructed to commit the terrorist act, were you warned that if you did not carry it out your life
would be in danger?
Arnold: When I gave my consent to commit such an act I was
afraid that if I did not carry it out they would suspect me as unreliable and put me out of the way.
Kaznacheyev: That is, you feared revenge?
Arnold: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: And did an.ybody threaten you?
Arnold: Cherepukhin and Shestov did not say that directly,
but t!tey said that if I betrayed them they would put me out of the
way.
Kaznacheyev: These hints were made to you by whom?
Arnold: By Cherepukhin, also by Shestov. Shestov also spoke
. to me in this spirit nnd warned me.
'-

331

Kaznachegev: May I, in passing, put a question to the accused
Shestov? Do you confirm this part of Arnold's explanation?
Shestov: Yes, I can confirm that a hint was made to Arnold
about hi:s ibad past.
Kaznachegev: \Vas this hint made when he -was being recrui~
too?
·
Shestov: Somewhat later.
Kaznacheyev: At what time was it? 'When he was being given
the commission, or when he was being recruited?
Shestov: At the end of the recruiting period, that is, when the
time was approaching to give him a definite commission.
Kaznacheyev (to Arnold): Now a few questions about your biography. You have said where you were roughly until 1923. And
what was your history after that time and until 1933-34?
Arnold: My history was as follows. I worked at Kemerovo eight
years, and then in Ku~netsk \Vorks Construction. I worlked in
Kemerovo as office manager for three years, I was then in charge
of water transport, then worked in the commercial department
a whole year, .and was then in charige of the telephone system.
Kaznacheyev: This was all at Kemerovo?
Arnold: Yes. When the reorganization took place in 1928 and
the chemical industry was separated from the Kuzbas, I was assigned to the Kuznetsk Works Constructbn. This was at the end of
1929 and I worked there until I was dismissed.
Kaznacheyev: So it was for a fairly long period of time?
Arnold: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: Did you join the Party in the So\ti_et Union or
in America?
Arnold: I joined again in the Soviet Union in 1923.
Kaznacheyev: You said at the preliminary investigation that
while in America you had connections with the Communist Party.
Were you a member of the Communist Party, or not?
Arnold: I was considered a member of the Party, but in Ru~sia
I joined again.
·
Kazriacheyev: And in America you were at one and the
same time a member of the Party and a member of a masonic
lodge?
Arnold: Yes.
Kaznacheyev: From what motives did you join--the masonic
lodge in America?
Arnold: On the one hand, I thought that I would mix in better
society, and then, purely for the reason . . . how shall I put it, the
masons generally enjoy a good reputation and so I joined them.
Kaznncheyev: And what w_ere your motives for joining the
Party after that?
332

Arnold: My motives were that after all I was a worker, and l
ought to be together with the workers, so I applied to join the
Party.
Ka=nacheyev: When you were recruited for the Trotskyite organization, had you any idea, even an elementary one, about
their program?
Arnold: They assured me that the Trotskyite organization was
strong, that it would come to power, and that I would not be
among the last people then.
Kaznacheyev: That is, they said that they would come to
power and they would not forget you? I have no more questions
to ask.
·
The President: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*·

*

*

Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: We shall now proceed to the examination of
llie accused Livshitz.
,
Vyshinsky: Accused· Livshitz, tell us when you resumed your
underground, Trotskyite, criminal activities?
Livshitz: Actually, from 1933.
Vgshinsky: Under what circumstances?
Livshitz: I learned about the first meetings and the first conversations on the resumption of Trotskyite work from Loginov at
the beginning of 1932.
·
Vyshinsky: How are we to understand, "I learned about the
first conversations on Trotskyite work from Loginov"?
Livshitz: When Loginov returned from Berlin at the beginning of 1932 he told me about his meetings with Pyatakov and
about the new instructions he had received from Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: And was this the first fact connected with the
resumption of your Trotskyite activities?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Tell us please, what exactly did Loginov tell you
about this new line?
Livshitz: Loginov told :are the following: that he was in Berlin
in 1931 at the time the orders were being placed for industry, and
that there he met Pyatakov. Pyatakov had known us for a long
time.
Vyshinsky: Whom do you mean by us?
Livshitz: Myself, Loginov, Golubenko, Kotsyubinsky. He told
us a)>out the meetings he had had! with .Smirnov and Sedov, that ·
the struggle whkh was waiged in the period 1923-28 had not
yielded any results, and that in view of this Trotsky had now given
instructions to adopt other methods of struggle, the methods of
terrorism and destructive activities in the economk sphere.
333

Vgshinsky: ls that what Loginov told you?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vgshinskg: Quoting whom?
Livshitz: Quoting Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: Do you mean that Pyata:kov jnstructed Loginov to
convey this to you?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, this was not just a conversation between you and Loginov, but Loginov was delivering a message?
Livshitz: Yes .
.Vyshinsky: And he transmitted this to you .as the new line?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What was your attitude towards it?
Livshitz: I idid not give Loginov a definite reply, but said that I
would meet Pyatakov and hear what he had to say. In the second
haff of 1932 I met Pyatakov and he repeated in effect what
Loginov had told me.
Vyshinsky: And did he speak about terrorism?
Livshitz: Aibout terrorism and destructive work. After my conversations with him, I agreed to re5ume the active struggle.
Vyshinsky: Let us establish the exact time.
Livshitz: Please.
Vyshinsky: You say that this was in 1932?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen exactly?
Livshitz: In the autumn, or the end o.f 1932.
Vyshinsky: Either the early autumn or the late,Ji.utumn?
Livshitz: At any rate in the second half of 1932:=
__
Vyshinsky: Did Pyatakov tell you where he had received Trotsky's new instructions?
Livshitz: He d.id.
Vyshinsky: Namely?
Livshitz: Namely, that he had met Smimov in Berlin. lfhere
had been conversations with Smirnov and Sedov· aibt>ut this directive of Trotsky's, which he had accepted and had un<lertaiken to
transmit and to enlist people whom he knew and with whom he
was connected by personal friendship and by Trotskyite counterrevolutionary activities in the past.
Vyshinsky: What post were you then holding?____ .. __ _
Livshitz: Chief of the Southern Railway.
Vyshinsky: Did you give your consent?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And what happened next?
Livshitz: ·when I arrived in Kharkov, I talked it over with my
assistant, Zorin.
·334

Vyshinsky: \Vhat was his post·?
Liushitz: He was my assistant.
Vyshinsky: On the same railway?
Liushitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vhy did you talk to him about things of this
kind?
Liushitz: I knew him to be secretly a Trotskyite, and that was
why I spoke to him. In my conversation with Pyatakov it was
agreed to begin by hindering the loading of coa:l.
Vyshinsky: Tirnt is, you began by disrupting the program?
Liushitz: Yes. We had too few cars, not enough for the whole
freight. And, in addition, I did not load all the coal and utilized
the cars for freight of secondary importance.
Vyshinsky: Did you do this deliberately as part of the plan for
carrying out this aim?
LifJshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What did you achieve by it?
Liushitz: As a result of this, coat accumulated at the pitheads.
From time to tirrne commissions from Moscow would come to me
and compel us to get the coal away. We would do so, but we would
then allow coal to aocumulate again.
Vyshinsky: That is, you consciously and deliberately disrupted
the transportation of coal?
Liushitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: When did you begin to do this?
Liushitz: During the winter of 1933. I niet Pyatak.ov at the end
of 1933 and told him what was happening ori the railway. On his
part he told me of the existence of the united centre and of the
reserve centre, the so-called parallel centre. He then told me that
- Serebryakov, a member of the centre, had been put in charge of the
wrecking counter-revolutionary work on the railways, and proposed that I should get in t-0uch with him.
Vyshinsky: Did you get in touch with Serebryakov?
Livshitz: I did, at the end of 1933 and the ·beginning of 1934.
I told him of what I had been doing on the Southern Railway.
Al that time I was already appointed chief of the North Caucasian
Railway. Serebryakov told me then that he had enlisted for wrecking work on the railways A:· M. Arnoldov and ~'1ironov. He also
mentioned Rosenzweig or Mirsiky.
Vyshinsky: At the preliminary investigation you said both
Rosenzweig and. Mirsky. Was that a slip?
Liushitz: I might have made an omission at the preliminary
/ihvestigation. Perhaps I mentioned both.
Vyshinsky: That is, you are now being more exact? At the pre335

Jiminary investigation you sai<l (Vol XXVUI, p. 27): "Serebryakov told me that he had already be.gun to restore connections
with Trolskyites working on the railways, that he was already
connected with :Mir.sky, Rosenzweig and Arnol<lov, who, like myself, had started. undermining, wrecking work." So that at the
preliminary investigation you spoke rather more definitely about
these two--Rozenzweig and l\firsky?
Livshitz: I at that time .didJ not mention the name of Mironov,
but I am mentioning it now.
Vyshinsky: Then whom did you discuss with, Serebryakov?
And I must warn you that you must speak only what you are
certain abO'llt, what you quite. firmly remember. What names did
Serebryakov mention?
Livshitz: Arnoldov, Mironov. ~ . .
Vyshinsky: That you rememlber quite firmly? At that time you
omitted to mention Mironov?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Accusoo Livshitz, do you affirm that these two
names-Rosenzweig and Mirsky-were also mentioned by Serebryakov, or are you ·confusing them with other persons?
Livshitz: I aU!rm that, I hold to what I say.
Vyshinsky: So that you consider that Serebryakov mentioned
tb.ese names, but that they slipped your memory?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What ne~t? You came to an arrangement with
Serebryakov?
Livshitz: At this meeting Serebryakov told me ofJhe work performed by Arnoldov, who was employed in the Prople's Commissariat of Railways.
--...
Vyshinsky: What was his position at the time?
Livshttz: He was chief of the Car Administration.
Vyshinsky: Very well. Proceed.
Livshitz: He also said that on Serebryakov's instructions Arnoldov was canying on wrecking work in the traffic department,
and that Serebryakov had discussed with him the question of dis·
rupting the freight traffic plan. Then Arnoldov worked to .disrupt
the exploitation of cars.
·
·
Just at this time it was decided to build four new car-repair
works. Arnoldov gave the opinion that each of th~$.<e_ w9rks would
cost from 15 to 20 million rubles and that they could he1milt
and put into operation in one and a half years. It turned <QUt in the
end that each of these wonks1 cost over 50 million rubles and took
about three years to build.
Vyshinsky: Were they deliberately delayed?
Livshitz: Yes. During the same conversation, Serebryakov pro336

posed that the consignments of oil for the sprmg sowing campaign
should be disrupted on the North Caucasian Railway, where I w:u;
working. \Ve did not do this, because the consignment of oil was
under very strict supervision.
Vyshinsky: You did not succeed in doing this?
Livshitz: We did not succeed because the consignment of oil
was under very strict control.
Vyshinsky: But were attempts made to do it?
Livshitz: During my conversation with Serebryakov I told him
that .this was a very difficult matter. Actually, nothing could be
done because a representative of the Council of Labour and Defence was keeping an eye on the consignments. Another job we
performed on the North Caucasian Railway was to retaiJil empty
cars needed by the Don Railway and the South Eastern Railway,
and for coal loadings. On the North Caucasian Railway I enlisted
several people in the work, among them Kolokolkin, former chief
of the Political Department of the Rostov Traffic Department, who
later became the assistant chief and.then chief of the Political Department of the North Caucasian Railway.
Vyshinsky: Did you speak to Kolokolkin ab()ut other aims and
objects, apart from wrecking?
Livshitz: I talked to Kolokolkin about everything. Then I was
transferred to Moscow, to the Moscow-Kursk Railway. I did not
work there long and was appointed Assistant People's Commissar
of Railways.
Vyshinsky: In what year?
Livshitz: In 1935.
Vyshinsky: Did you meet Serebryakov in 1934?
Livshitz: I have spoken about the meeting with Serebryakov
in 1934.
Vyshinskg: And that exhausts the subject?
Livshitz: During the second meeting with Serebiyakov he mentioned people with whom he was connected.
Vyshinsky: Very well. During this second meeting, did he speak
about disrupting the oil consignments in 1934?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Very soon after this you were transferred to a third
railway?
.
Livshitz: I was transferred in May 1935 and remained there
two months.
Vyshinskg: You were chief of the Moscow-Kursk Railway?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, in .July 1935 you were appointed to
the People's Commissariat of Railways?
Livshitz: Yes.
337

Vyshinsky: \Vhile Assistant People's Commissar of Railways,
<lid you continue your connection with the Trotskyite organization and your wrecking activities?
Livsl!itz: Yes. When I came to Moscow I had meetings with
Pyatakov, we discussed the faet that Kaganovich would now get
at all the details that were hampering the work of the railways.
Pyatakov proposed that the wrecking activities should be oondncted more energetically, because although Kaganovich had been only
a few months at the People's Commissariat of Railways, the railways had already made pronounced progress. Pyatakov then pro-posed that I should see Serebryakov once more an<l discuss what
was to he done. The conversation with Serebryakov took pla,ce and
Serebryakov declared that the chief task was to frustrate the fulfilment of Kaganovich's order setting forth the methods of improving the work of the railways. He explained this 1by the fact
that the railways were the central nerve of the country. Serebryakov further said that he had not broken off connections with Arnoldov, Mironov, Yemshanov and others. He had told them to get
in touch with me. In 1935 and in 1936 these people formed connections with me without discontinuing connections with Serebryakov. Mironov, Mirsky and Kupryansky formed connections
with me in 1935, and Rosenzweig in 1936. They ha<l received directions from Serebryaikov and I repeated the instructions to frustrate Order No. 183, which enumerated the principal measures to
be taken to improve the \vork of the railways.
Vyshinsky: And what did Order No. 183 principally deal
with?
"':
Livshitz: Order No. 183 dealt principally with the wotk: of locomotives; it mentioned the chaotic work of the locomotives, described how the work of the loco:motive brigades was to be organized, how the work of the depots \Vas to be organized . . . .
Vyshinsky: And finally?
1
Livshitz: Then there was the question of maintaining constant
minimum supplies of spare-parts for locomolives, the question of
technical running speed, the terminal-to-terminal time of locomotives, and so forth.
Vyshinsky: Did you personally transmit instructions for di<.rupting Order No. 183, or did you act only throu.gh S~r:e_bryakov?
Livshitz: No, no, I also transmitted them. I also repeat~-these
directives.
Vyshinsky: You repeated them. And did all these people, members of the Trotskyitc organization on the railways, take measures
to carry out your instructions to disrupt the Order, or did they
not?
338

Uvshitz: On a number of railways this Order wa~ carried out
very badly. On the Tomsk Railway. . . .
Vyshinsky: \Vas it in connection with your instructions, or
independently of you?
Livshitz: Both independently and in connection with.
Vyshinsky: That is, you helped to prevent the carrying out of
the order?
Livshitz: Yes. The Tomsk Railway carried it out very ba<lly.
Vyshinsky: And in your capacity of Assistant People's Commissar of Railways, you ougnt to have done the very opposite?
Livshitz: Not quite. It must not be thought that as Assistant
People's Commissar I was engaged only in wrecking work, in that
onlv.
~Vyshinsky: No, of course, not in that only.
Livshitz: I also performed useful work. I do not want to talk
about that now, because that is not the question . . . .
Vyshinsky: I put that question. I said that in relation to Oroer
No. 183 of the People's Commissar, you should have, as I undel'stand il . . .
Livshitz: Yes, and not ev-erything I did in connection with Order No. 183 was to disrupt it.
·
Vyshinsky: And why did you not do everything to disrupt it
when that was your aim, when you organized people to disrupt
it, when you gave these people instructions to -disrupt it? Why did
you not do everything to disrupt it, but did some things not to disrupt it? Why?
Livshitz: If I <lid all that alone, I might be in a position to decide to disrupt everything. But millions, thousands of people are
working on the railways.
Vyshinsky: That is, it did not depend upon you?
Livshitz: And not only because it did not depend upon me. I
repeat, not everything I did was bad.
Vyshin$ky: What induced you to do something good? After all,
you were a member of the Trotskyite organization and <lid that organization set itself the aim of doing good work on the railways, or
disruptive work?
Liushitz: Disruptive work.
Vyshinsky: That was your aim? Naturally, you could not do
everything in pursuit of thiS aim; you could not destroy everything. \\'by?
Liushitz: The aim was not to destroy the railway system to
such an extent as to bring it to a standstill.
Vyshinsky: \Vh<it aim did you set yourselves?
Liushitz: To complicate and hamper the work of the railways.
339

.· Vyshinskg; DM you do that? Did not your position as.Assistant
People's Commissar hinder you doing that?
Livshitz: It <lid hinder, but I did it.
Vyshinsky: Did you betray your duty to the state?
. Livsliltz: If I had· not betrayed it, i should not now be here
in the dock.
Vyshinsky: It happens that people betray for a time and escape
getting into the dock.
Livshitz: As you see, I did not escape.
Vyshinsky: You did not escape, because there happened to be
vigilant people w:ho put you in the dock. You <lid not come of
your own accord, you were dragged here. I ask you, did you endeavour to frustrate Order No. 183 of the People's Commissar?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you take measures to carry it into effect, or
·not to carry it into effect? Livshilz: Since I say that I endeavoured to frustrate it, that
means that I worked to frustrate it.
Vyshinskg: And. thereby you betrayed the duty you owed to
your _position. Is that right?
· Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Who helped you in frustrating the Order, who were
your immediate assistants?
Livshitz: I have already said, I named Mironov, Knyazev . . . .
Vyshinsky: What were your relations to Knyazev?
Livshitz: Before p~SiI!g to Knyazev, I want to t~l the Court
the following. At Lhe preliminary investigation I deniecl.-:_ ·.. I
denied one very hideous thing. . . .
Vyshinsky: Namely?
Livshitz: The question of espionage.
Vyshinskg: True, you did deny it.
Livshitz: A hideous thing, a vile thing.
Vyshinskg: Even worse.
Livshitz: You may call it what you like.
Vyshinskg: You may call it what you like, the quesfani is not
what you call it.
Livshitz: The question is not what you call it, but what it is
in. fact.
-···- -· - · Vyshinskg: Whafdo you now want to tell?
Livshitz: For those same reasons I denied ·at the preliminary l
investigation my connections with the accused Turok. I want to l
make a clean breast .of it to the Court, although it is a heinous
crime, the crime which is called treason to the country. I want to
1·

340

tell the Court that I knew about this connection of Knvazev and
Turok with th~ agents of a certain foreign power.
Vyshinsky: You knew about it?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How long have you known about it?
Livshitz: From 1935 until my arrest. And not only that, at
Knyazev's request I gave him certain mater-ials for transmission
w

to. • . .

Vyshinsky.'. While you were . . . ?
Livshitz: Assistant People's Commissar.
Vyshinsky: To proceed. \Vhen did you learn from Knyazev about
this criminal connection, what did you learn from Knyazev, what
did you do in connection with what you learned, what assistance
generally did you give Knyazev in this crime, how active was the
part you took in this crime of Knyazev?
Livshitz: I have already said that in 1935, When Knyazev
formed connections with me. . . .
Vyshinsky: Tell us how Knyazev-formed connections with you,.
where, why, under what circumstances, in what connection and
in what form?
Livshitz: I already knew about Knyazev from Serebryakov_
I knew that he was a secret Trotskyite and belonged to an organization in the Urals. During a conference of railway chiefs, I
cannot now recall whether I approached him or he approached
me, and we then discussed his activities on the South Urals Railway.
Vyshinsky: What did they consist in?'
Livshitz: They consisted in destructive. wrecking, diversive
work on the railways. He told me of the train wrecks he had organized.
·
Vyshinsky: And did other members of the Trotskyite organization on the railways also organize train wrecks?
Livshitz: Apparently, they did ..
Vyshinsky: Why "apparently"? Did you yourself give instructions to organize train wrecks?
Livshitz: I did.
Vyshinsky: So not "apparently organized/' but organized on
your instructions.
Livshitz: I have already said that if I am to answer, yes, I did
organize them, then I must say where, when, which.
Vyshinsky: Well, take a concrete case: did Knyazev organize
train wrecks on the railways?
Livshitz: He did. ·
·
J

341

•

•

Vyshinsky: Did you give Knyazev instruclians to organize trai11
wrecks?
Livshitz: I did.
Vyshinsky: While you were . . . ?
Livshitz: ·while I was Assistant People's Commissar..
Vyshinsky: You gave instructions to organize wrecks on the
railways. And did you talk with Knyazev about loss of life, which
is bound to happen in railway accidents? .
·
Livshitz: I do not specifically recall any such talk, but since
wrecks are caused on the railways-and there are passenger,
military trains and freight trains on the railways-naturally there
will be loss of life.
.Vyshinsky: You were prepared to incur loss of life?
Livshitz: I was prepared.
.
Vyshinsky: You were prepared for it. Deliberately?
Livshitz: Since I gave instructions to cause train wrecks, that
means I knew what the consequences would be.
Vyshinsky: When you spoke about organizing train wrecks in
this same talk with Knyazev, did Knyazev tell you that he was
connected with the intelligence service of a certain foreign state?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did he say that this intelligence service was demanding that he, Knyazev, should organize train wrecks?
Livshitz: I cannot now recall. Possibly he did.
Vy.~hinsky: Comrade President, may I put a question to
Knyazev?
The President: You may.
. ~
Vyshinsky: Accused Knyazev, you had talks with Livshliz?
Knyazev: Yes, I had.
·
Vyshinsky: Did you talk about the organization of train wrecks?
Knyazev: It was in August 1935.
Vyshinsky: You talked about organizing train wrecks?
Knyazev: That was the initial stage of the talk.
Vyshinsky: Did you propose this method of struggle or did
Livshitz?
Knyazev: No, when I met him. . . . Is it necessary to explain
how the meeting took place?
Vyshinsky: It is not necessary. You will speak about that in
detail when 've come to examine you.
---·- - Knyazev: When I met him I was aJr.eady a member of the
Trotskyite organization. That was in April 1934.
Vyshinsky: What was your official position?
Knyazev: Chief of a railway.
Vyshinsky: And Livshitz, was he Assistant People's Commissar?
842

Knyazev: He had only just been appointed Assistant People's
Commissar.
Vyshinsky: And you, chief of a railway, meet with your superior
and discuss with him how to organize train wrecks?
Knyazev: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: And when this talk a(bout train wrecks took place,
was he already Assistant People's Commissar?
Knyazev: No, he was not, but I knew that he was about to be
appointed Assistant People's Commissar, because during the conference there was already talk in the lobbies that he was selected
for appointment as Assistant People's Commissar.
Vyshimky: And did you have occasion to meet him when he
was Assistant People's Commissar?
Knyazev: I did.
.
Vyshinsky: Did you have occasion to discuss train wrecks with
him?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is, there was such a situation when you, the
chief of a railway, _discussed with your superior, the Assistant
People's Commissar, how to organize train wrecks on the railways?
Knyazev: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: And at that time, did you discuss the fact that the
intelligence service of a certain foreign state was also interested
in these train wrecks?
Knyazev: We did.
Vyshinsky: When was that?
Knyazev: When we met, as I have said, I had already been a
member of the Trotskyite organization for about a year and, consequently, I had already received instructions about disruptive
wrecking activities before I met Livshitz. These instructions were
to organize train wrecks which put locomotives out of action.
Vyshinsky: That is too detailed.
Knyazev·: What I want to say is that this was the general form
of disruptive work, and that later I received specific instructions
from Livshitz to- organize train wrecks on the railway.
Vyshinsky: \Vas this the Trotskyite line, or the line of the
Japanese intelligence service?
Knyazev: It was the line· both of the Trotskyite organization
and of the Japanese intelligence service.
Vyshinsky: And were you, Knyazev, already enrolled as an
agent of the Japanese intelligence service?
Knyazev: I had been enroiled in September 1934.
Vyshinsky: What position did you hold in the Japanese intelligence service since September 1934?
343

Knyazev I was ·connected with the Japanese.
Vyshinsky: And at the same time held the position of agent
of the Japanese intelligence service?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you tell this to Livshitz? Did he know about it?
Knyazev: Yes.
·
·
Vyshinsky: When you talked to Livshitz about the organization
of train wrecks on the railways, did you mention that the Japanese
intelligence service was demanding the organization of such train
wrecks?
·
Knyazev: I put the matter to him thus: that later, when I. bad
established conneCtions with the Trotskyifos, about half a year
later, connections were established with a Japanese agent, because
during the first conversations I had with this agent. . . .
Vyshinsky: He figures in the indictment, and under "hat
name? Have you read the indictment?
Knyazev: I have.
Vyshinskg-: How is he described, as· a spy?
Knyazev: No, as Mr. X followed by a dash.
Vyshinsky: Not X--, but H--.
And who is "Georgi ~vanovich ?"
Knyazev: That is his agent.
Vyshinsky: What is his nationality?
Knyazev: I think he is a Russian.
Vyshinsky: And what is your nationality?
Knyazev: I am· also a Russian.
·
Vyshinsky: So, "Georgi Ivanovich" was an agent o~the Japanese intelligence service and you were an agent of the Japanese
intelligence service. \Vell, proceed.
Knyazev: \Vhen I met Livshitz I told him that the line of the
Japanese coincided with the line of the Trolskyites with regard
to disruptive activities. But the Japanese were demanding sec;et
information, and I simply could not grasp that.
Vyshinsky: ·what did you not understand, why they were
interested in secret information?
Knyazev: Yes. I said that this was going beyond the instruction&
I had formerly received from Turok.
V:yshinsky: That is, the instructions about disruptj_y~ a_~tivities?
Knyazev: Yes.
· -Vyshinsky: What did Livshitz reply?
Kngazeu: He said that the circumstances of the struggle of the
Trotskyite organizatioris against Stalin'~ leadership were such that
not only must we carry on disruptive adivities, but that we must
also establish connections with foreign powers.
34·4

Therefore, if such connections might facilitate our struggle,
then it is quite clear that we have to maintain such connections.
Naturally, the information demanded by the Japanese was chiefly
pursuing military aims. I told Livshitz what that information was. Livshitz replied that since lhe Trotskyite organization
was connected with foreign governments, this information should
be given in order to maintain connections with the Japanese. That
was the character of our conversation.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, Livshitz sanctioned your connection >vith the °Japanese intelligence service, linking it up with the
aims of the Trotskyite organization, and you c0ntinued to act
along those lines?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: May I question the accused Turok?
The President: You may.
· Vy$hinsky (to Turck): What do you know about the connections with the Japanese intelligence service?
Turok: I had established ronn~ctions with the Japanese intelligence service while I was working on the Kaganovich Railway, formerly Perm Railway, in 1934. I had instructions which
were agreed upon with Maryasin, to whom I used to report on
my Trotskyite activities.
·
Vyshinsky: And what connections did you have with Knyazev?
Turok: He informed me tha.t he had established connections
with the Japanese intelligence service, and I informed him.
Vyshinsky: Why did you have to tell other people of such
secret matters?
Turok: Because both I and he were members of the Trotskyite
organization and we were in close contact.
Vyshinsky: Where were you working?
Turok: As Assistant Chief of the Traffic Department of the
Perm Railway.
Vyshinsky: And Knyazev?
Turok: Knyazev was chief of the South Urals Railway.
Vyshinsky: That was rather far away.
Turok: Yes, but if necessary I can relate how in general connections were established with him in the Trotskvite work.
Vyshinsky: You can tell that later. Do you confinn what
Knyazev said about his connections with the Japanese intelligence
service?
Turok: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And <lid' you know that Livshitz knew of this?
Turok: I went to see Livshitz on September 15, 1935, and had a
talk with him and told him that I was connected with the Japanese intelligence service. Livshitz replied that this connection should
345

not be broken off, but it should be maintained in the interests of the
Trotskyit~ organization.

Vyslzinsky: Accused Uvshitz, <fo you confirm the statements
made on this head by Knyazev and Turok?
Livshitz: They are corrt=0f'.t in the main.
\!'gshinsky: Although at the preliminary investigation you denied them?
Livshitz: I have told the Court why.
Vy.~hinskg: I only want to make it perfectly clear that when
confronted with_ Knyazev at the preliminary investigation you
denied this.
Livshitz: I was not confronted with hini..
Vyshinsky: You were not; but you were shown Turok's statement during the interrogation in the office of the Procurator of
the U.S.S.R. You denied lhis point.
.
Lioshiiz: I have declared why I now think it necessary to make
these statements to the Court.
·
Vyshinsky: I do not in the least want to minimize the importance of the fact that you have made this declaration; I only want
this matter to be cleared up at the trial.
Livshitz: I formerly penied it, but ·now I have declared to the
Court, I have testified to it.
Vyshinsky: You are now giving a truthful statement and confirming what Knyazev and Turok say?
Livshitt: Correct.
Vyshinsky: Tell me: after learning about Knyazev's connections from him, did you have any talks with him, give instructions concerning connections with the intelligence service"? - :--Livshitz: I said that there were not only connections, but that
in 1936 he asked me for some material for the Japanese intelUgcnce
service, and I gave him the material.
Vyshinsky: Well, and apart from giving him this material theJ.t,
was there any other occasion on which you saw Rnyazev?
·
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: And you d1d not revert to this with Knyazev any
more?
Livshitz:- No.
Vyshinsky: But did you know that the Japanese intelligence
service paid money for the receipt of this information 7-- Livshitz: No.
· Vyshinsky: May I put a question to Turok? Accused Turok,
a.re you aware that the Japanese intelligence service paid money
for this information?
Turok: No, they did not pay us money for this information, but
346

in gPneral for the organization of Trutskyite diversive activities
we received money.
Vyshinsky: From whom?
Turok: From the Japanese intelligence service.
Vyshinsky: So the Japanese intelligence service met their notes,
and in addition paid you in cash?
Turok: I paid out the money. . . .
Vyshinsky: Wait with the paying out, and tell us first: did you
receive money?
Turok: Yes, I did.
Vyshinsky: From the Japanese intelligence service?
Turok: Yes.
Vyshinsky: When did you receive money?
Turok: In January 1935-35,000 rubles.
Vyshinsky: What did you do with it?
Turok: I kept 20,000 rubles for my own organization and gave
15,000 for Knyazev's organization.
Vyshinsky: To whom did you hand it over?
Turok: To Knyazev in person, in May 1935.
Vyshinsky: Accused Knyazev, is this correct?
Knyazev: Yes, I received it.
Vyshinsky: Tell me, accused Livshitz, what did you know
about tl?-e terrorist activities of the Trotskyites?
Livshitz: I knew about the preparations for attempts on the
lives of Stalin, Kossior and Postyshev. Nothing else.
Vyshinsky: From whom did you know about this?
Livshitz: From Pyatakov, Serebryakov and Loginov.
l'yshinsky: When did you !know about this?
Livshitz: In 1933 and 1935. I knew in 1933 that preparations
were l;>eing made for an attempt on the lives of Postyshev and Kossior, and in 1935 for an attempt on the life of Stalin.
Vyshinsky: Did you know what preparations were being made
for these attempts and who was making them?
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: And did Loginov speak to you in general about
preparations, or did he tell you that their group was preparing?
Livshitz: He said he was preparing.
Vyshinsky: So you knew .who was preparing attempts against
whom?
Livshitz: No, he said that the Ukrainian centre--he a;nd Golubenkcr-----were making the preparations.
Vyshinsky: Well, that is just what I am saying-that he, Loginov, and Golubenko were directly preparing a terrorist act.
Livshitz: Organizing it.
347

Vyslzinsky: Yes, orgamzmg it. Jn regard to Kossior and
Postyshev you knew about this directly?
Liushilz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In regard to Comrade Stalin, who was making the
preparations?
_
Liushitz: I did not know who was making the preparations. I
kriew about the preparations from Pyatakov and Serebryakov.
Vyshinsky: Did Pyatakov and Serebryakov tell you what organization was making the preparations?
Liushitz: The organization of the parallel centre. Vyshinsky: That the parallel centre was making the preparations?
·
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Who were the members of the parallel centre?
Livshitz: Pyatakov, Serebryakov, Radek a:nd Sokoinikov.
Vyshinsky: Who was ma.king the preparations then?
Livshitz: The parallel centre-Pyatakov, Serebryakov, Radek
and Sokolnikov.
·
·
Vys hi nsky: Also -well known people?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you personally know those people who had
direct charge of organizing attempts on the lives of Comrades
Kossior and Postyshev, and in 1935 on the life of Comrade Stalin?
Liushitz: I understoQd your question to refer to those persons
who were to carry out the attempts. Or to those who were organizing them?
Vyshinsky: Those who were the organizers.
Livshitz: I did not know who were to carry out th~ attempts
in person, but I knew those who organized them.
- --...
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions.
The President: Tell us, accused Livshitz: to which of the members of the Trotskyite organization enumerated by you did you
give direct instructions regarding the organization of train wrecksJ
Liusitz: To Knyazev, Yemshanov, Arnoldov, Turok, Fufryansky, Rosenzweig.
The President: How was your directive regarding the organization of train wrecks carried out by all the persons you have
enumerated?
Liushitz: I cannot say at the moment, because I did not receive
a report about the train wrecks which they effected,--butTknow
that there were wrecks.
The President: Did Fufryansky engineer wrecks at your instructions, or was he engaged in diversive and wrecking activities?
Livshitz: As regards train wrecks, I cannot say at the mciment;c
I do not know.
·
348

The President: In your testimony at the investigation you said
that Fufryansky informed you.
Do you confirm these statements of yours?
Livshitz: Yes.
The President: Did these persons whom you have named :make
you a report about their counter-revolutionary wrecking activities, or did they not?
·
Livshitz: You were asking ?bout the train wrecks.
Vyshinsky: I want to put in a question: Did they report to you
about their activities?
Livshitz: Fufryansky did.
The President: And the others? You had no time to get reports
from them?
Livshitz: No, I had no time.
The President: Do you confirm that Serebryakov talked with
you on the subject ·of diversive activities in a pre-mobilization
period, with a view to obstructing the movement of troops?
Livshitz: Yes.
The President: \Vhen did this conversation take place?
Livshitz: In 1933.
·
The President: In what month?
Livshitz: In September or October.
The President: On whose initiative did this conversation take
place--yours or Serebryakov's?
Livshitz: Serebryakov's.
The President: Did you immediately agree with him?
Livshitz: That is of no matter today.
The President: I ask you: did you agree?
Livshitz: I agreed, but that is of no matter today.
The President: I have asked what I have asked, and you listen
attentively to what I am saying. Did you report to your leader
Pyatakov about Knyazev being a Japanese spy and Turok also
being a Japanese spy, or <lid you not?
Livshitz: In my opinion Pyatakov knew.
The President: Did he know about it from you?
Livshitz: I did not tell him.
The President: But how ·did you know that Pyatakov knew
that Knyaz~v was a Japanese spy?
Livshitz: Seeing that Knyazev was in touch with Maryasin, and
Turok \Vas in touch with. . . .
The President: With whom?
Livshitz: (Remains silent.)
The President: What were the last cliversive instructions about
349

wrecking activities on the railways which you received from your
leader Pyatakov or from Serebryakov before your arrest? \Vhat
were the last instructions?
Livshitz: I do not remember.
The President: There were instructions which you received in
1933, 1934 and 1935, but in 1936 you had .no instructions?
Liushitz: They were the same. There were no new instructions.
The President: But what were the last instructions, if there
were no new instructions? ·what did Pyatakov talk to you about?
About wrecking and diversive activities or about some other?
Livshitz: About wrecking and diversive activities.
The President: About diversive activities in the field of railway transport. \Vhat were Pyatakov's instructions?
Livshitz: He gave instructions about train wrecks.
The President: ·Train wrecks-that's number one. \Vhat else?
Livshitz: Train wrecks, wrecking of the locomotives.
The President. Wrecking of the locomotives. \Vhat else?
Livshitz: Wrecking of the ttack.
The President: Wrecking of the track-and what else? What
methods?
Livshitz: Here it was a question of the non-fulfilment of the
plan.
The President: The plan is linked up with repairs. That means
not carrying out repairs properly and when required. \Vhat
other methods of work were contained in the plan· of your activities?
A
Livshitz: There was nothing else.
The President: ~ow regarding the period of mobilization or
a pre-mobilization period: what measures were you contemplating
in conjunction ·with Pyatakov and Serebryakov-without mentioning either stations or lines?
¥
Livshitz: I do not remember.
The President: You don't remember? But perhaps you will
think and tell us?
Livshitz: I do not remember.
The President: Did you give definite instructions to Knyazev
that it was necessary to organize wrecks, in particular oJ _mili~ry
trains and troop trains?
Livshitz: In particular, I did not give such instructious--in par-!
ticular; in general I did.
The President: Did Knyazev report to you that he had succeeded in effecting a wreck at olne station, as a result of which 29
Red Army men were killed and 29 Red Army men injured?

j

350

:

Livshitz: Yes, I knew about that.
The President: In general, may I ask, what did Knyazev report
ahou t the wreck, and you, did you praise him or censure him?
Livshitz: I did not -censure him.
The President: And you did not praise him?
Livshitz: I neither praised nor censured him.
The President: You merely took cognizance of it as an account
of activities?
Livshitz: Yes.
The President (to Vyshinsky): Have you any questions?
Vyshinsky: Accused Livshitz, seeing that you have further
frankly confessed in court today that you are guilty of espionage,
that is to -say, have acknowledged yourself guilty to the full extent
of all the charges made against you, perhaps you wish today to give
more detailed statements in regard to terrorism as well. For example, did you not know more specifically from Loginov what preparations were made for the attempt on the lives of Kossior and
Postyshev, who made these preparations?
Livshitz: No, I <lid not know.
Vyshinsky: Did Loginov tell you only ahout the fact of the
preparations, or did he say anything more specific?
Livshitz: Loginov said yesterday in his testimony in court that
there ~\'ere only general instructions. I confirm ,...-hat I said at
the preliminary investigation.
Vyshinsky: So you did not have more detailed conversations
or more detailed information? Loginov did not tell you anything
more specific?
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: And in regard to the attempt on Comrade St.a.lin's
life in 1935?
Livshitz: No, he did not tell me about that either.
Vyshinsky: Do you not recollect what Serebryakov, for example, told you, who was preparing the attempt?
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: There is not very much point in simply knowing
what is on foot. You are a member of an organization, and a fairly
prominent one. Either you should not have been told at all, or, if
you were admitted to the seeret, there was some practical aim in
view. Otherwise there is no point.
Livshitz: If I had known, I would say so.
Vyshinsky: I ask you to search your memory once again. Is a
man named Dedzievsky known to you?
Livshitz: He is.
Vyshinskg: Were you not in touch with Dedzievsky?
351

Liushitz: He worked on the Southern Railway.
·. Vyshinsky: Did you know that he was also a member of the
Trolskyite terrorist organization?
Liushitz: I knew .
. . . Vyshinsky: Did you give him specific commissions, guiding
lines, instructions?
Livshitz: No, I did not. If he received instrudions, it must have
been from my assistant, Zorin.
Vyshinsky: And you are not aware that Lo.ginov gave him ter·
rorist instructions?
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: You are not aware that Dedzievsky was also connected with the terrorist group?
Livshitz: Dedzievsky was in touch with Loginov.
Vy.<;hfnsky: Knowing that he was in touch with Loginov, and
knowing that Loginov was making preparations for a terrorist
act, did it not occur to you that Dedzievsky might have a hand in
this affair?
Livshitz: No, I went away. . . .
Vyshinsky: You knew that Loginov was making preparations
for a terrorist act; you ..knew that Dedzievsky, while working in
your immediate proximity, was in touch with Loginov. Are these
not grounds for assuming that you also knew that Dedzievsky was
taking part in Loginov's activities, and Loginov was making prepc
arations for a terrorist act?
Livshitz: But I say that I did not know this.
Vyshinsky: And you did not guess?
~
Livshitz: I did not know and I do not know.
Vyshinsky: You only know that he was in touch with~Coginov?
Livshitz: Yes, but Loginov was not engaged only in terrorist
activities.
Vyshinsky: You knew that Logiriov was engaged in preparing
terrorist acts?
(
Livshitz: I knew.
Vyshinsky: You knew that Dedz.ievsky was connected with
Loginov.
Livshitz: I knew.
Vyshinsky: Did not this give you groU1I1ds for assuming that;
Dedzievsky was connected with Loginov by tenor_i~J qe~gns?
·
Livshitz: No.
- · -. Vyshinsky: And by others. So it did not even occur lo you,
and Loginov did not speak to you specially about Dedzievsky?
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: Very good. Now as regards Glebov-Avilov, did you
not know that he was engaged in terrorist activities?
352

Livshitz: Glebov-Avilov told me about this.
Vyshinsky: So this fact was also known to you from GlebovAvilov?
Livshitz: Yes, yes.
Vyshinsky: Don't ·he offended. I am merely verifying the statement made at the preliminary investigation. It is my duty to do
this.
Livshitz: I am not offended, I understarnd.
Vyshinsky: Don't get excited.
Livshitz: I am not excited.
Vyshinsky: So .it may be concluded that Glebov-Avilov and
Byeloborodov were making preparations for terrorist acts in Rostov?
Livshitz: I knew from Glebov-Avilov that Byeloborodov was
making preparations for a terrorist act.
Vyshinsky: Against whom was he making preparations for a
terrorist act?
Livshitz: Against Stalin.
Vyshinsky: You knew this?
Liushitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So Glebov-Avilov together with Byeloborodov were
making preparations for a terrorist act against Comrade Stalin,
and Loginov against. . . ?
Livshitz: Against Kagarnovich and Postyshev.
Vyshinsky: And then you hearo from Pyatakov and Serebryakov that another terrorist act was being prepared against Comrade Stalin, but they did not tell you who was to do it and how?
Livshitz: That's so.
l'yshinsky: And you did not try to ascertain yourself?
Livshitz: No.
Vyshinsky: And Byeloborodov?
Livshitz: I am not acquainted with Byeloborodov.
Vyshinsky: So you heard about Byeloborodov from Glebov~l\.vilov?

Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So now it will be necessary to ask Byeloborodov
himself?
Livshitz: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Nevertheless a certain complex of terrorist facts
bas accumulated around your case.
LiVshitz. AHthese facts are in the preliminary investigation.
Vyshinsky: I am not saying that I am revealing anything new.
l am merely verifying the material of the investigation.
Livshitz: I understand.
353

VyshinsJ:y: ~fay I put a question to the accused Serebryakov'?
The President: You may.
Vyslzinsky: Accused Serebryakov, do you confirm the conversation with Livshitz concerning the preparations for a terrorist
act against Comrade Stalin?
·
Serebryakov: If that conversation occurred, it could only have
taken place in a most general form.
Vyshinsky (to Livshitz): When did Serebryakov tell you about
this?
Livshitz: In 1935 during our conversation in my railway car.
Vyshinsky: Accusoo Serebryakov, were you in Livshitz's railway car in 1935?
Serebryakov: I was.
Vyshinsky: Did you have a conversation with Livshitz?
Serebryakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What about?
Serebryakov: Ma_inly about wrecking work on the railways.
Vyshinsky: vVere questions o.f terrorism mentioned there among
other things?
Serebryakov: No.
Vyshinsky: You do not remember?
Serebryakov: No.
Vyshinsky: Livshitz?
Livshitz: Yes, I say what I remember.
Serebryakov: I am not saying that such talk might not have
taken place.
·
Vyshinsky: You merely plead that you do not recfillect?
Serebryakov: Yes.-Yes, the more so since my com"t:l"Sation.
took place before I had heard from Pyata'kov.
Vyshinsky: In this connection I want to ask Pyatakov, since
Serebryakov pleads forgetfulness. Accused Pyatakov, do you confirm this?
.(
Pyatakov: I did not inform LiYshitz about this specially, but
he was informed about the terrorist aims and preparations; but r
did not inform Livshilz about any particular preparations,
Vyshinsky: I am not referring to any special organization.
Livshitz says that he learned from you that preparations were being made for a terrorist act against Stalin. Did you-speak JQ.kivshitz about this?
Pyatakov: I do not remember.
Vyshinsky: You spoke to Livshitz about terrorist acts?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you say agafost whom the preparations for this
terrorist act were being made?
354

Pyatakov: I spoke to Livshitz about terrorism, but I did not say
against whom.
Vyshinsky: You confirm this?
Pyatakov: I confirm it, but as reg::irds preparalions for a terrorist act against Stalin, I <lo not confirm it.
Vyshinsky: Livshitz says he learned that the centre was making
preparations for a terrorist act against Stalin. Do you confirm this?
Pyatakov: No~
Vyshinsky: So you did not speak with Livshitz?
Pyatakov: I <lo not think I ·did.
Vyshinsky: But Livshitz says that he heard about this from
you. You do not confirm this then? ·
Pyatakov: No, I do not confirm it.
Vyshinsky: Then permit me to ask you: were preparations being made for a terrorist act against Stalin?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You took part in these preparations?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So it is a fact, as Livshitz says, that preparations
were being conducted for a terrorist act against Stalin? This is true?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, it follows that Livshitz might have
learned about this from someone else?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: But you confirm the fact that preparations were
being made for a terrorist act?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky {to Livshitz): Serebryakov and Pyatakov insist that
they did not have this conversation with you. Perhaps you did not
have the conversation with Pyatakov and Serebryakov, but perhaps
_with someone else-perhaps with Sokolnikov, or perhaps with
Radek?
Lillshitz: I did not speak with Sokolnikov, and 1 made Radek's
acquaintance for the first time here, in the <look.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, you did not know of his existence,
did not know that Radek existed?
Livshitz: No, I knew of him, knew of his existence, but I was
not acquainted with him.
Vyshinsky: If Pyatakov and Serebryakov deny this, then, looking at the question objectively, who of the accused now seated
here-:-<>r perhaps of those who will sit here in the future--who
may know, who knew about this and could have told you?
Livshitz: I can answer that both have forgotten about it, because I did not talk to other people on this matter, so that if I knew
I could only have learned it from them.
355

The President (to Radek): You raised your hand. Do you want
to say something in connection with this?
Radek: Yes.
The President: You may.
Radek: \Vhen we, the members of the centre, spoke with the
members-with such important members of the organization as
Livshitz-we did not speak about details,. we mentioned neither
place, nor time, nor group. We mentioned however the group of
persons against whom the acts were aimed. Just for this reason
the difference of opinion may lie in the fact that Serebryakov or
Pyatakov <lid not say that the act would be carried out at once,
or in a month, or in six months, but among persons •as important as
Livshitz we used to talk, and just for this reason Livshitz cannot
be telling an untruth about such things as an attempt on the life of
Stalin.
Vyshinsky: Accused Livshitz, were you confronted with Pyatakov on January 17, 1937? Incidentally this will have bearing
on the accused Pyatakov, so I will ask him to pay attention to this
declaration. At the confrontation the question of terrorism was
also referred to. (Reads): "Question to Pyatakov: Did you give
Livshitz directives concerning .terrorism and wrecking on that occasion? Answer: It is difficult to recall exactly at what time I gave
Livshitz these directives. Question to Pyatakov: Is this to be understood in the sense that in general you gave such directives to Livshitz? Pyatakov: Of course, this conversation with him took place:'
At the end: "Question to Pgatakov: Did you inform Livshitz
a:bout the preparations that were being made for teqprist acts
against the leaders of the C.P.S.U.? Pyatakov's answer: \VheJQ_er I
spoke specifically about this, I do not recall, in any case Livshitz
knew about the terrorist activities ·which the centre was carrying
on." Is this correct?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, you confirm that Livshitz knew aboat
the preparations of terrorist acts against the leaders of our Party
and government, and, consequently, against Stalin.
Pgatakov: I confirm that this was directed against certain persons, among them being Stalin.
Vgshinsky: How did Livshitz learn this?
Pyatokov: From me, among others.
. _ ._
Vgshinskg: So it may be said that Livshitz could state that he
knew?
Pyatakov: No.
Vyshinsky: For me the question is clear. Livshitz spoke with
YOU about terrorism?
- Pyatakov: Yes.
356

Vyshinsky: That the parallel centre was making preparations
for terrorism?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyslzinsky: That preparations for terrorism were being made
against the leaders of the C.P.S.U. and, consequently, against
Stalin?
Pyatakov: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So there was such a conversation with Livshitz?
Pyatakov: Of course.
Vyshinsky: So Livshitz could conceive that when speaking
about the terrorist act, you informed him that this terrorist act
was being prepared against Stalin as well?
Pyatakov: That is just what I am talking about.
Vyshinsky: In my opinion the question is clear.
The President: The Court is adjourned till 11 tomorrow morning.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium· of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

/'

A. ROSTYUSHKO
Military J urlst First Rank

MORNING SESSION, JANlJARY 27_, 1937, 11.00 A.M.

Commandant: The Court is comin~. Please rise.
The President: The session is resumed. Comrade Vyshins}j.y,
have you any questions to put to Livshitz?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: Have Couruel for Defence any questions to put
to the accused Livshitz?
Braude (to Livshitz): During the first con'Versation with Knyazev regarding his relations with the Japanese intelligence service
did you mention the names of the persons from whom you had
learned about this?
Livshitz: No.
Braude: And you did not mention Pyatakov?
Livshitz: No.
Braude (to Knyazev): Did Livshitz tell you that the source of
this information wa.s Pyatakov?
Knyazev: I recollect precisely that when I saw Livshitz he
knew about my connections with the Trotskyite organization and
my relations with the Japanese. Pyatakov told him aB'E>ut this.
Braude: Accused Livshitz, 'vhen Knyazev came to you an(l told
you that the Japanese intelligence service demanded that train
wrecks be effected, did he tell you this by way of information, or
did he ask for sanction?
Livshitz: By way of information.
f
Braude: Accused Knyazev, how was lhis? Did you come with
the information or in order to fintl out how the Trotskyite organization regarded the proposal made to you by the Japanese intelligence service?
J{nya::.w: I told Livshilz as follows: that in connection with the
Japanese the latter stipulated two -conditions-to carry on undermining work and to provide a number of data. Although Tur'Ok
said that it was absolutely necessary to do this, nonetheless I
wunted to make sure once again whether it had to !be done.
Braude: So you asked for sanction from the Trc·tskyite organization? The .stand to be tn ken \Vas not quite clear to you? \Vhat
did Livshitz answer?
358

Knyazev: He told me that this resulted from the logic of the
struggle of the Trotskyite organization.
Braude: Accused Livshitz, tell me please: in connection wilh
the question put by Knyazev as to whether the Trotskyite organization would sanction the wrecking of trains, did you not speak
about the stand which the Trotskyite organization would take in
the event of war against the Soviet Union?
Livshitz: I do not recall any such conversation with Knyazev.
Braude: Accused Knyazev, do you not remember what Livshitz
said regarding the stand the Trotskyites would take in the event
of war?
Knyazev: ·(Remains silent.)
Braude: Did he not tell you that the members of the Trotskyite organimtion would themselves fight against the Soviet gO'Vernment with anrus in their hands?
Knyazev: At the investigation I made a detailed deposition.
This question came up between us during lengthy conversations
with Livs!hitz, and his answer--or rather the way he explained
these connections with the Japanese-was that now all hopes were
banked on bringing matters to a head, in the form of a war with
some one of the foreign powers.
Braude: You said this yesterday.
Knyazev: That in this war the Trotskyites would pursue a defeatist line and by combining all internal forces hostile to the Soviet power and t-0 the Party, utilizing these forces, the Trotskyitf'..s
would even be compelled to deliver a stab in the back in order to
undermine the success of the war in this way. That was the spirit
in whkh he spoke.
Braude: I have no more questions either to Livshitz or to
Knyaze\'.
The President: Have you any questions, Comrade Vyshinsky?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: \Ve will pass on to the examination of the accused Knyazev. Accus.ed Knyazev, do you confirm the depositions which you made at the preliminary investigation regarding
your counter-revolutionary activities?
Knyazev: I confirm them fully.
The President: Comrade Vyshinsky, have you any questions?
Vyshinsky: Accused Knyazev, when did you begin your
counter-revolutionary activities?
.
Knyazev: In April 1934. Up to then I had never belonged to
the Trotskyite grouping, but I experienced waverings as early as
'1930-31 on questions of industrialization and th~ 'collectivization of
iagriculture and the work of the railways. And from these. waver359

ings I hpsed into view6 "'hich <lid not separate me from the·views
Qf the Trotskyites.
Vyshinsky: That was as early as 1930?
Knyazev: Yes, in 1930-31.
Vyshinsky: So at that.lime :it was the bad work of the railwnys
that upset you and aroused your doubts? Right?
Knyazev: All the t~me I held high posts as traffic manager on
a number of railways, a:nd I more than any other of the railway
officials. came in contact with that branch of 1he manageria1 work
which is decisive in railway transport. And
my part I regarded
this question from the viewpoint that it was impossible to im-.
prove the work of the railways by the methods that were then being
employed.
Vyshinsky: And did you know at that time that there were
people on the railways who were endeavouring in every way to
aggravate the situation on the railways?
'
Knyazev: Pennit me, I want to give details.
Vyshinsky: No, no details. Answer the question.
Knyazev: And besides this I knew that at that time Turok . . . . .
Vyshinsky: In 1930?
Knyazev: Yes, in 1930 TuTOk, with whom I was working on
the Kazan R~uilway and with whom I more >than once had such
conversations of an anti-Party and anti-state character-I knew
that "Turok had belonged to i.he Trotskyite opposition since 1926,
but I did not know whether he was taking active part in the Trotskyite struggle.
Vyshinsky: I am not aSking you about Turok j~:J: now. In
1930 did you know that there were all sorts of wrecking gJ:".Q,ups
on the railways?
Knyazev: I knew this; there were trials going on at that time,
Vyshinsky: So you knew that the railways were working ba<lly
because they were made to work badly?
Knyazev: Quite right.
(
Vyshinsl.:y: \Vhy did you say that you were influenced in your
waverings by a lack of confidence in the strength of the railways, .
when you could see that the!;e railways were being deldberately
wrecked by anti-Soviet people?
Knyazeu: These w~n-erings of mine were fostered and <level-;~
oped in me, as I have said, systematically in conversations wiJh ~
Turok.
··
Vyshinsl.:y: So Turok made systematic attempts to influence~
you in an anti-Soviet direction?
You were not yet in the Party at that time?
:,
1. Knyazev: I was in the Party. I do not want to accuse Turok in:
any vrny, I only want to slate the facts.

for

1

360

ryshinsky: When did you enter the Parly?
Knyazev: I have been in the Party since 1918.
Vyshinsky: \Vere you unable to offer any opposition to Turok.
on your part'! \Vhy did you yield to his attempts to influence you?
Knyazev: I don't k,now why I yielded, hut at that time I was
still worlcim:g honestly.
Vyshinsky: I am not asking you how you.were working at that
time. I put another question to you. I ask you: why did you yield
to the anti-Soviet influence of Turok? Can you answer my question?
Knyazev: I considered that the Trotskyites-as Turok tdld me
about the views of the Trotskyite opposition-were right in their
struggle against the Party, and that they could solve these problems on the railways in another way. That was it, mainly.
· · Vyshinsky: In 1926 were you against the Party and against the
Soviet state?
Knyazev: No.
Vyshinsky: Did you .fake part in this struggle of the Trotskyites.
against the Party?
Knyazev: I took part in the struggle against the Trotskyites.
Vyshinsky: So at that time you were not yet a Trotskyite?
Kngazev: I was not.
Vyshinsky: How did Turok feel out your weak spot so as t<>
convert you :into a Trotskyite?
Knyazev: You see, at the time when we saw each other in 1934,
he was already working in the Urals, while I had also come to the
Urals and was appointed chief of the South Urals Railway, and.
during the splitting up of the Perm Railway I had, as far as.
I can remember, three conversations with him. Turok recommenced in the same strain the talk about the policy of the
Party on industrialization and the collectivization of agriculture.
I v:ell remember each of these conversations.
Vyshinsky: You had several conversations during which Turok tried to influence you? \Vhat sort of conversations were these?'
Knyazev: In effect, these were counter-revolutiona.ry conversations.
Vgshinsky: And they exerched a certain influence over you?
Knyazev: Yes.
.
Vyshinsky: Do you not think that yon were to some extent
prepared for this by your past?
Knyazev: Since 1930.
1c,
Vyshinsky: And prior to 1930?
i Knyazev: Not further back than that.
i, Vgshinsky: Tell me, were you not a member of the Party of

!~cialist-Revolutionades?

361

J<.nyazeu: I was a sympathizer of the Left Socialist-Revolution.aries.
Vyshinsky: And before the Lefts?
Knyazeu: The Sooialist-Revolutionaries had a Left wing at that
time:
·
Vyshinsky: The Left wing-is not that the same as the Party
-0f Sooialist-Revoluti01I1aries?
Knyazev: I was merely a sympathizer.
Vyshinsky: From what year to what year?
Knyazev: From 1917 for about six:1'een months, I believe.
Vyshinsky: So you adhered to the Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries, in particular to the Left wing? Right?
Knyazev: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: Where were you living at that time, in what town'?
Knyazev: 1n the army, 3Jt Yaroslavl.
·
Vyshinsky: At Yall"oolavl? In what year was that?
Knyazeu: In the latter half of 1916.
Vyshinsky: And where were you at the time of the Whiteguard
Socialist-Revolutionary Menshevik mutiny?
Knyazev: I was also in Yaroslavl.
Vyshinsky: Did you taike part in the mutiny?
Knyazev: No, I was at that time in hiding.
Vyshinskg: And did you take piart in the suppression of the
mutiny?
Knyazeu: Yes, I did .
. Vyshinsky: So· at that time you adhered to >the platform of
Soviet power?
Knyazeu: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And la.ter you entered the Party?
Knyazev: Yes. Because the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries took
action, and this criminal act I forsook the Left Socialist-Rev-0lutionaries and joined the Party.
Vyshinsky: So up to 1930 you had waverings, and in 1934 yotl
joined a group of Trotskyites under the influence of Turok?
Kngazev: Yes.
Vyslzinskg: Permit me to ask Turok. Accused Turok, do you
~onfirm Knyazev's reference to you as the man who drew him
into the Trotskyite organization?
.
Turok: No, n-s regards 1931 I <lo not -confirm this;.._as regards
193 !, I confirm it.
-Vyshinsky: You drew him in?
Turok: I did.
Vyshinsky: And did you have a conversation in 1930 on the
subject of Trotskyism?
Tmok: No, that was in 1931.
1

362

Vyshinsky: You were already a Trotskyite at that time?
Turok: I was.
Vyshinsky: An active one?
Turok: No, I had not officially joined any group, but 1 adhered to Trotskyite views.
Vyshinsky: You were a concealed Trotskyite?
Turok: Yes, a concealed one.
Vyshinsky: Bemg concealed means that you did not come out
openly? Did you try to influence anyone?
Turok: I had conversations with Knyazev on the subject.
Vyshinsky: You did not talk with anyone else?
Turok: I do not recall any ~ther people at that time.
Vyshinsky: You did not try to influence anyone at that time?
Turok.• No.
Vyshinsky: During your whole life you only tried to influence
Knyazev?
.
Turok: In 1931 Knyazev was the only one; afterwards there
were a number of others about whom I will speak later.
. Vyshinsky: Since you tried to influence people, to. draw them
into the Trotskyite organization, does this mean you were rui actiYe
Trotskyite or not an active one?
·
Turok: An active one.
Vyshinsky: And so you enticed Knyazev?
Turok:· In 1934--yes; I drew him into the organization.
Vyshinsky: And when did you begin to entice him?
Turok: Properly speaking, I did not entice him. My talks with
Knyazev regarding Trotskyite views were mutual.
Vyshinsky: So it was he who enticed you?
Turok: I do not know who enticed whom, but in general we
did not have any great 1arguments.
VysHinsky: The ground was prepared?
Turok: Unquestionably.
Vyshinsky: But a conversation in 1931 did take place?
Turok: Yes, there was a conversation in January 1931.
Vyshinsky: Do you not remember on what grounds you began
your attempts to influence Knyazev?
Turok: On questions of the industrialization of the country and
collectivization.
Yyshinsky: I am not asking on what questions you talked. \Vhy
did you turn your attention to him?
Turok: \\Te were working together on the Kazan Railway at
:the beginning of 1931. During one of our conversations I spoke to
him about there being very great compHcations and difficulties in
our country in connection with collectivization, difficulties of food
'.supply in the countryside and the towns. Knyazev also gave me
363

to understand that he ;regarded these complications as a result of
the incorrect policy of the Party.
Vyshinsky: And on this basis began your closer acquaintance?
Turok: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Sit down, Turok. Accused Knyazev, proceed. In.
1934 you joined the Trotskyite counter-revolutionary underground
organization?
·
Kngazev: Permit me first to tell something about internal
activities the Trots'k.yiite organization was connected with, and
then proceed to its externalJ. connect1ons.
,
Vgshinskg: First of all, tell me what you did as a member of
the Trotskyite undermining- organization, and whether you-·:did
anything?
Kngazev: I will deal with this in detail.
Vgshinsky: Did you take part in diversive and wrecking activities on the rnilw.ays?
Kngazev: I did.
Vgshinskg: What kind of adivities?
Knyazev: The or:ganization of train wreeks, damaging the per'manent way and locomotives; the aim pursued was to undermine
the work of tJ1e Ural:s industry, especially metallurgy. The Trotskyites on the South Urals Railway sabotaged the program for the
repair of the railway track. Instead of investing the funds assigned
in the reconstruction of the track by whole seetions, we diffused
them on work on separate kilometres.
Thus they did ·not give the required effect, and the track continued to deteriorate. The aim irrl view was to bring about ;..q. large
number o.f train wrecks.
The second form of undermining work was disorganizing the
repair of locomotives, paying less care to the locomotives, so as to
put them out of at.::tion in the long run. All these methods of undermining work were en-dorsed by Livshitz in 1935. At the same time
Livshitz said that we must now pass from general methods of
undermining activity lo train wrecks involving loss of human life;·
I thereupon asked Livshitz ·whether we Trotskyites could really be
::igainst the working class, against the population in general. Liv~
shitz said that it was a question of a very fierce struggle ::igainst •·
Stalin, that we must caus.e the Party leadership to become com- i
plete1ly discredited in the eyes of the people, and, by a number_ Qtl
separate blows ::igainst the population, cause embitterment against
Stalin, against the government, :md create the impression among
1he population that the government, was to blame for all
fhi~

.

Such was his stand regarding the new policy of train wrecks ..
with loss of life.
-.

After my return to the line I told the members of the organization who were on my line at that time; on the line administration
were Levin, assistant manager of the traffic department, Dolmatov,
manager of the maintenance department, Bochkarev, my inspector, and engineer Shcherbakov. At my instructions these persons
formed an organization on the line directly at the place of work.
I knew the leadiing members of these organizations on the line.
In particular there was the permanent way mana•ger of the
Yyazovaya-Zlatoust section, Korolkov, the permanent way manager
of the Shumikha section, Bor<lovich, tlle station master on the same
section, Markevich, a number of his assistants-Vaganov, Rykov,
Rodin; at Kur.gan, the permanent way manager Novikov, and the
permanent way manager of the Ufaleya sectfon; Pavlovsky. These
were the men in the maintenanoe department.
In the traffic department there was Lizunov and a number of
:his assistants, and Shibayev, the station master at Kurgan. As I
said, there was the Shumikha station master, Markevich, the traffic inspector Kuznetsov, Khrebtov ou the Zlatoust section, the assistant station master Romanov, and Fadeyev, the station master
at Kosyrevo. That is all, in so far as the traffic departme:nt was
-concerned.
In the tractiOIIl department the followinig were dvawn into
Trotskyite un<leranining counter-revolutionary work: on the Kurgan section_;_Nikolayev, chief of the depot, Andreyev, his assistant,
and engineer Starostin., besides Mogilny, a foreman of the locomotive service. On the Zlatoust section there was the locomotive
foreman Surnin, and in the Chelyabinsk depot engineer Kolbik.
As far as I remember, ·engine-driver Granin.
These persons formed the cadres of my Trotskyite organization on the South Urals Railway.
·when ·r ·told Levin, Bqchkarev, Shcherbakov and Dolrnatov,
after my return from Moscow and my meeting with Livshitz, that
the task now was to organize train wrecks with loss of human life,
Levin said there and then that this could be organized with the
help of Markevich, the station master at Shumikha.
On October 27 (our conversation had been in the latter half
-0f August) a train wreck took place at Sbumikha. It was organ.ized in the fo1lowing way: Markevich had a number of assistants . . . .
Vyshinsky: \Yhat kind of train was wrecked?
Knyazev: A troop train.
Vyshinsky: Do you remember the number of the train?
Knyazev: No. 506 or 504.
Vyshinsky: Troop train No. 504, according to the findings. Did
'JOU draw up these find.ings?
365

Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did these findings of yours reflect the real state of
affairs?
Knyazeu: I gave an incorrect explanation, a false one. I concealed the fact that· this train wreck was done by the- Trotskyite
organization.
.
· Vyshinsky: \Vhat circumstances helped to conceal the real
state of affairs?
Knyazev: As far as I remember, I was in Kurgan at the time.
I was told there had been a train wreck at Shumikha. I thereupon
left for Shumikha by special train, and went straight to look at
the soene of the smash. When I arrived there, the assisfant station
master Vaga:nov came up to me and from the hints he dropped
I understood that this was the work of Markevich.
I grasped at once that this was the work of our organization.
It had been organized directly by Kolesnikov, the head switchman
on duty at t>he arrival switches.. He had ordered Chudinova, a girl
apprentice on duty at that time, to turn arrival switch No. 14 onto
a track that w.ais occupied. Since this apprentice did not under-'
stand what the oorrect positfon of the switches should have been,
she ~p.rrie.d O!J.t his instructions.
An old skilled switchman who was standing at the switch on
the track along which the train should really have arrived was
meanwhile sent off by Koiesnikov to clean the glass on the lamps.
Vyshinsky: And who was left at the switch?
. Knyazev: There was no one at the switch. The traiin, travelling at high speed, about 40 or 45 kilometres an hcQllr, sped off
down the eighth track, on which a freight train ·of o~ was
standing.
·
Vyshinsky: How many were killed?
Knyazeu: Twenty-nine Red Army men, and 29 were also injured_
Vyshinsky: Injured severely or slightly?.
Knyazev: I ·cannot say at the moment.
Vyshinsky: This did not interest you?
Knyazev: I was interested, bu~ l cannot say ·exactly just now.
Vyshinsky: You, the chi~f of the line, were not interested how
many men were injured and how?
Knya::.eu: I undoubtedly knew this.
Vyshinsky: You, the chief of the railroad?
Knyazev_· Yes.
Vysliinsky: You arrived at the scene of the wreck?
Knyazev: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: Here was a train wreck quite out of the ordinary,
366

involving a large number of victims-Red Army men killed, Red
Army men injured-and you, the chief of the railroad, do not
know whether the injuries were severe or slight?
Knyazev: At that moment I undoubtedly knew.
Vyshinsky: If you knew, you ought to remember, or wais this.
not the only such train wreck on your line? Don't evade the question.
Knyazev: There were train wrecks, but not such big ones as.
this.
Vyshinsky: You do not remember if these twenty-nine Red
Army men were badly mutilated?
Knyazev: About fifteen were badly mutilated.
Vyshinsky: But what sort of serious injuries were there?
Knyazev: They had arms broken, heads pierced. . . .
Vyshinsky: Heads pierced, arms broken, ribs broken, legs.
broken?
Knyazev: Yes, that is so.
.
Vyshinsky: This happened by the grace of you and your accomplices?
·
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And do you know how the preparations for this.
train wreck were organized?
How were forces distributed, how was the trairi WTeck itself
organized?
· Knyazev: Rykov, the acting station master, received word from
the dispatcher at Chelyabinsk that a troop train was coming
through, and he told Kolesnikov, the head switchman, to "get
ready to receive it."
Vyshinsky: What did Rykov say?
Knyazev: Rykov said that a troop train was coming, and we
mu-st cause a itrain wreck, route it so as to "prepare it wrongly."
Yyshinsky: Not "prepare it wrongly," but receive it wrongly?
Knyazev: Prepare it wrongly and thereby see that it was
wrongly received.
Vyshinskg: Did not you say it more simply: "The train must
be wrecked"?
Knyazev: (Remains silent.)
Yyshinsky: Can't you rem,ember?
Knyazev: I do not remember.
Vyshinsky: Let me remind you. (Reading.) "Two or three stations before Shumikha station, the .acting station master Rykov received a message from the man on duty at Chelyabinsk station
that train No. 504 was due to arrive at Shumikha station. Having
received this message, Rykov informed Markevich that a trooptrain was coming, saying: "\Ve'll start action at once."

867

"After this Rykov summoned the head switchman Kolesnikov
and warned him that a troop train vrns coming and it had to be
wrecked."
.
Not "get rea.dy to receive it"-it was sai<l directly, exactly, spedfically: ~'Wreck the irain." Consequerttly, direct instructions were
given: "Get ready for mass murder." And whom did you utilize
for this purpose?
Knyazev: The ·apprentice switchman Chudinova.
Vyshinsky: Was she also one of the conspirators?
Knyazev: No.
Vyshinsky: So you chose as your tool a person quite aside from
the organization? Had she started work on the railway shortly
before?
Knyazev: Only about two weeks before.
Vyshinsky: And so you sent an apprentice with two weeks'
expt:rience to receive a troop train? According to railway service
regulations, is that permissible?
·
Knyazev: Impermissible.
Vyshinsky: So you violated the law; violated the regulations
in the eyes of everyone?
•Knyazev: Correct.
Vyshinsky: But why was such a violation of railway service
Tegulations possible? Was it not because the administration of the
station was in league with the Trotskyites?
Knyazev: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: Name these persons.
Knyazev: Markevich, the station master, Rykov, the"'acting station master, Vaganov, assistant station master, Rodionov, assistant
station master, Kolesnikov, head switchman.
Vyshinsky: Five.
Knyazev: Switchman Bezgin.
Vyshinsky: Six.
r
Knyazev: And then there was also the permanent way manager of that section, Brodovikov.
Vyshinsky: Yes, and the chief of the railroad himself. Correct.
So twenty-nine plus twenty-nine--fifty-eight casualties. Twentynine killed and the rest maimed. Proceed.
Knya::ev: Seeing that there ha<l been such ~. _ba.d train ,
wreck. . . .
Vyslzinsky: No, is that all as regards the organization of the ·.
train wreck?
Knya::eu: No. I want to tell about. . . . The question arose how ·
to cover up the traces of this affair.
Vyshinsky: \Ve will pass on to that somewhat later; for the
368

present I want to ask the Court's permission to include in the findings of the case a report about the train wreck at Shumikha station,
during which one locomotive and eight cars were smashed, a
report where it is recorded that twenty-nine Red Army men were
killed: Kryuchkov, born 1910, collective farmer; Sochilin, born
1913, collective farmer; Kolesnikov, born 1912, collective farmer;
Terekhov, born 1913; Khrapunov, Agapkin, . . . AIU, except the
workers Ivanov, Kolesnrikov and Ginkin, were collective farmers,
all were born in 1913. And twenty-nine Red Army men injured.
All Red Army men of the Ryazh.sky district, Moscow region. Are
these names fami,IiaT" to you?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vgshinsky: You made inquiries? You looked through the list?
Knyazev: I rlrew up the list myself.
.
Vgshinsky: You expressed regret?· Sighed and groaned? Grew
angry? Were indignant? As the form.er chief of the railroad who
engineered train wrecks, who murdered pas.sengers, workers, collective farmers, Red Army men? I I-h~ve no more questions now.
Member of the Court Rychkov: I am interested in the question
of whether you were enlisted first in the Trotskyite organizatiOn
or as an agent of the Japanese intelligence service.
·
Knyazev: The Trotskyite organization.
Member of the Court Rychkov: Were there attempts to enlist
you as an agent of the Japanese intelligence service before you
joined the Trotskyite organization?
Knyazeu: Yes, in 1931, when a group of Japanese specialists
were working on my railroad, but I categorically refused.
Member of the Court Rychkov: Categorically refused?
Knyazev: Yes.
Member of the Court Rychkou: Did you report this to the
proper authorities?
Knyazev: No, I did not.
J!ember of the Court Rychkou: Why?
Knyazev: I find it hard to say why I did not report it, hut two
days after the conversation this Japanese specialist left for hls
native country, so I considered that the conversation had come
to an end of itself.
•"Iii/ember of the Court Ryr:hkou: So you do not deny that attempts were made to enlist you in the Japanese intelligence service
as an agent in 1931?
Knyazeu: No.
Member of the Court Rychkov: But you refused and did not
report this to anyone?
Knyazev: Quite right.
369

Member of the Court Rychkov: And after 1931 did you correspond with the man who tried to enlist you?
Knyazev: I did not write to him, but I rec{3ived two or three
left{3rs from him.
·
Member of the Court Rychkov: From the depositions of Turok
at ~he preliminary investigation it appears that he enlisted you
in the Trotskyite organization knowing that you were an agent of
the Japanese intelligence service. Was this so?
Knyazev: He did not speak about my being an agent of the
Japanese intelligence service, but he knew of this conversation,
and Turok hiinself told me that this person had told him to bear
me in mind.
Member of the Court Rychkov: At the preliminary investigation
you stated that you gave your consent to take part in the activities
·of the Trotskyite organization only because you were afraid that
Turok would inform against you as an agent of the Japanese intelligence service. Correct?
Knyazev: No, he did not tell me that he would expose me as an
agent of the Japanese intelligence service. During the course of
all these conversations he spoke about our previous conversations,
and then gave me to understand that he knew about my conversations with this Japanese, and that if he want.ed to make use of
this conversation for the purpose of proving. my connection with
the Japanese, it would be difficult for me to prove that I was not
connected with the Japanese.
·Member of the Court Rychkov (to Turok): When you enlisted
Knyazev in 1934, did you know of his connections with ftie Japanese intelligence service?
~ --Turok: It was known that in 1930, when he was working on
the Kazan Railway and a group of Japanese specialists were working there, these negotiations were conducted with them.
Member of the Court Rychkov: ·wen, so was he enlisted or not?
Turok: -I do not know that. I know that such conversations
were held and that the person who had these conversations with
me frequently spoke well of him and was on good terms with him,
but I do not know whether he was enlisted or not.
Member of the Court Rychkov (to Knyazev): \Vhat spying information was handed over to the agent of the Japanese intelligence service by you in person? Was information given -regarding
mobilization plan?
Knyazeu: It \Vas given.
Member of the Court Rychkov: So you reveailed to the Japanese intelligence service certain data on mobilization plans?
Knyazeu: A number of data.
370

1lfember of the Court Rychkov: Concerning one railway?
Knyazev: Concerning the South Urals, Perm, Transbaikal,
Ussuri and East Siberian Railways.
Member of the Court Rychkov: How many train wrecks were
engineered by theTrotskyite organization under your leadership?
Knyazev: From thirteen to fifteen train wrecks were organized
directly by us.
Yes, but the increase in train wrecks was undoubtedly connected with the wrecking activities of the Trotskyite organization
in the other branches of industry as well. I remember in 1934 there
were altogether about 1,500 train wrecks and accidents.
Member of the Court Rychkov: Along what lines were your
wrecking activities directed?
Knyazev: Along the Jines of disrupting track maintenance.
Seeing that the traffic on the South Urals Railway consisted of
heavy rolling stock, I understood very well that if. . . .
Member of the Court Rychkov: ·what did you do specifically
in the way of wrecking the permanent way?
Knyazev: The ballast of the roadbed was weakened, which led
to the subsidence of the track. This resulted in rails snapping.
Member of the Court Rychkov: And as a result were there train
wrecks?
Knyazev: From these causes there were train wrecks on the
stretch between Yakhino and Ust-Katav in December 1935, also
between Yedinover and Berdyaush in February 1936.
Vyshinsky: Were there any victims as well?
Knyazev: There were, among the train guards.
Member of the Court Rychkov: A head guard and a senior
guard were killed?
Knyazev: Yes.
Member of the Court Rychkov: That is to say, in the first place
wrecking of the permanent way?
Knyazev: Quite right.
Member of the Court Rychkov: And secondly?
Knyazev: In the traffic department.
Member of the Court Rychkov: How was wrecking work carried on to destroy the locomotives?
Knyazev: Powerful locomotives of the FD type 'vere introduced in the Kurgan depot. Taking advantage of the fact that
not much was known about them in this depot, the management
deliberately slackened the supervision of current repairs, frequently compelled the engine-driv_ers to leave before repairs were completed. Almost ap.' the water gauges were reduced to a ruinous condition. As a result of this neglect, n boiler burst in January 1936·
371

on tlw Rosa-Vargashi stretch. As far as I remember, the engine.driver's mate and the fireman were killed, while the engine-driver
was thrown about 30 metres away. The engine was put completely
out of adion. All these undermining, wrecking activities in the
Kurgan :depot were iconducted by N'.i:kolayev, Andreyev, Starostin
and .Mogilny, and in the Zlatoust depot by the locomotive foreman Sumin.
Member of the Court Rychkov: The Party and the goviernment
supplied the railroad with powerful locomotives, and you Trotskyites spoiled them, put them out of achion?
Knyazev: Yes.
Member of the Court Rychkov: Put them out of action? Knyazev: Yes.
Member of the Court Rychkov: Tell me, did Livshit:z give you
no instructions as regards a sa;botage policy on questions of wages?
Knyazev: He did not.
Member of the Court Rychkov: On not paying wages at the
Tight time?
Knyazev: No, he did not.
Member of the Court Rychkov: Accused Livshitz, when you
were chief of the North Caucasus Railway, did you engage in sab-otage in regard to wages, in regard to the financial policy?
· Livshitz: Yes.
Member of the Court Rychkov: Through whom did you do this?
Livshitz: Through the head of the finance department.
· l1fember of the ·court Rychkov: His name?
Livshitz: Krein.
"""
Member of the Court Rychkov: In \Vhat did your sabot:rge consist, regarding the wage policy?
Livshitz: Not remitting the money in time.
Member of the Court Rychkov: So you deliberately held up the
workers' wages. Correct?
¢
Livshitz: Yes.
l1fember of the Court Rgchkov: ·what were you trying to'
achieve by this?
Livshitz: Discontent.
. ,
Member of the Court Ryc11kov: The discontent of the workers? 'i
And on whom did you lay the blame?
__ _
.
Livshitz: Not on anybody. They laid it on us. On the inai:iagement.
Member of the Court Rgchkov: How ·did you explain to the'
workers that you did not pay wages for two or three months at.
a time?
,
Livshitz: No explanation was made.
372

Jl.fember of the Court Rychkov: You did not explain and you
did not even want to explain it? And Knyazev did not give such
a line?
. Livshitz: No.
Member of the Court Rychkov: I have no more questions.
The President: Has the defence any questions?
Braude: Yes. Tell us, accused Knyazev, ,did you have three
conversations with Turok regiai-ding your activity?
Knyazev: Yes, we met in 1934 and afterwards also.
Brdude: Did you consent· when Tmok first proposed that
you follow up your statement by jo1ning the TrotSkyite organization?
·
Knyazev: ·The fir.st time I refused.
Braude: The first time you refused. Now, between April 10 and
15, according to your testimony, you had a second conversation
with Turolk iregarding the work of the Japanese intelligence service. At that time you consented to join the organization?
Knyazev: At that time I gave my consent.
Braude: Did I understand you to say you would not have joined
if Turok 'had ndt mentioned that he knew a[bout your conversation
with agents of the Japanese intelligence service and that he would
expose you?
. Knyazev: Allow me to relate. . . .
Braude: Tell us, did this play an impartant part in your joining the organization?
Knyazev: Of course, it played a part.
Braude: But what actually happened, what conversations did
you have in 1929 and 1930 w1th rep.res-entatives of the Japanese
intelligence service? vVere they in the form of concrete proposals
to work for them or were they preparatory to your subsequent
work?
·. Knyazev: These conversations were in 1931, as I have stated,
two days hefore the final departure of a group of Japanese specialists from the Soviet Union upon termination of their oontracts
with the Soviet government. One of the groups of Jap:mese specialists which were in the Soviet Union came to me. This group, as is
known, consisted of the following specialists. . . .
The President: You do nqt have to mention names.
Knyazev: And a number of other specialists. These other specialists came to· me to thank me for our joint work and for the
faciliti_es that had been provided for the Japanese specialists on
Jhe Kazan Railway. They told me that the Japanese government
lwould like the feeling of good will which they had encountered
[here on the Kazan Railway and especially on my part, to remain
!as a pleasant recollection, and they expressed their thanks for all
373

\his to !he govcrnmC'nl ns well. Then, at the close of the conversation. ?dr. H--.said to me: "Pcrh:ips you would not refuse al times
lo unckrtakc to supply c(·r!ain dala regarding Soviet railways for
the J ap~rnese gowrnmcn \'I" I sensed !lint tliis was a perfoclly undi.sguised question of espionage and calegorica1ly refused, declar·ing that I would not abuse my business connectfons and there
could be no talk of other proposals. \Vith this our _conversation
ended.
1Jr1111de: Relate briefly how this recruiting was carried on.
Knyazev: In September 19_34 a man, 40 to 45 years of age, came
to visit me in Chelyabinsk and said that he had come on behalf
of 1fr. H--. I met Mr. H - - himself in 1935, and in Moscow
in 1936 when he arrived for diplomatic work, to occupy a diplomatic post at . . .
Vysliinsky: I wou1d ask that the accused be warned . . . .
Tlie President: Accused Knyazev, there have been repeated
warnings concerning the manner in which t~1e open sessions are
to be conducted.
Knyazev: But I am not mentioning any names.
Braude: Accused Knyazev, tell me please, did the stranger \vho
visited you at your office and described himself as the representative of l\fr. H-- invite you to join in a categorical form?
Knyazev: He told me that he had arrived on the instructions
of Mr. H - - and said that he wanted to continue the conversation that was broken off in 1931. I told him that there could be no
conversations on this subject and orderoo him to clear out im. mediately, otherwise, I said, I would inform the Peo~.le's Commis
sariat of Internal Affairs.
Braude: How did he react to that?
Knyazev: He then tried, as we raih,:aymen say, "to put thr
wind up" me, but I would not yield. Seeing that nothing was coming of it he said that J\fr. H - - had asked him to say that connections with the Japanese would no longer be maintained as sepanfte
individual action hut that it followed logically from the methods of
struggle employed by the organization with which I was conneded, and as far as he could understand from the information
he had receiYe<l from ?\fr. H--, this organization also had some
connections with Japan. Consequentl;.', my connections with Mr.
I I - - would no longer bear the character which frightened me _[n
1931. Connections of the org:rnization were already a fact.
Then he went on to '5:1)' lhat the forms an<l the tnsks which would
bP set later on did not run count€r to the tasks of thi.s organization. I as1':cd lhc str::rnger what sort of tasks these were. He
cnumcrntcd the same things that Turok had, namely undermining
work on the railw:tys, wrecks, damaging of locomotives, sabotage
374

in industry. And for the first time I remember he said it would be
desirable to obtain in;formation on how many troop trains had
gone through to the Far East during 193-4.
Braude: You did not answer my direct question. \Vhen you
tried to refuse and said that you would turn the unknown citizen
over to the authorities of the People's Commissariat of Internal
Affairs. did he make any direct threats to you?
KnyazeP: He told me bluntly that I was connected with the
Trotskyite organization.
Braude: And what would happen if you refused?
Knyazeu: That .it would not be to my advantage .
. Rraude: \Vhat pl'ecisely?
Knyazeu: That in one way or another the Party and organs
of justice would be informed.
.
Braude: You were told that the Japanese intelligence service
would expose yom belonging ·to the Trotskyite organization?
Knyazeu: Yes.
Braude: At the preliminary investigation you gave a fairly
specific answer in this connection. (To the President.) Allow me to
read it.
The President: You may.
Braude: You, accused Knyazev,. in the preliminary investigation said: "Having been placed in a hopeless position and fearing that my criminal activities as a member of the Trotskyite
organization would be exposed, I gave my consent to work Dn
behalf of the intelligence service." Is that right?
Knyazeu: That is right.
Braude: You informed the Court that when Turok recruited
you for the Trotskyite organization he intimidated you and threatened to expose your connections with the Japanese intelligence
service.
Knya::.eu: Yes.
Braude: Next, when Turok recruited you for the Trotskyite organization he referred to the fact that he had information regarding your conversations with the representatives of the Japanese
intelligence service?
Knyazeu: Yes.
Braude: And now the representative of the Japanese intelligence service, when he recruited you, referred to the fact that he
already knew of your organizational connections with the Trotskyite organization?
Knya::.eu: Yes.
Braude: \Vho reported this reciprocal information, who establishq'd this close connection of information between Turok and
the J :i.panese organization?
375

Knyazeu: I think that in one conversation that I had with the
representative of Mr. H - -. . . .
The President: Accused Knyazev, I call you to order.
Braude: But let :us assume that this conversation with this
Mr. H - - became known to Turok.
Knyazeu: When I had my conversation with Mr. H - - he .did
not refer to Turok. But afterwards, when I met Turok, in the
latter half oif September, 1934, and told him that a representative
from Japan, from Mr. H - - had been to see me and asked him
his opinion of the matter, Turok said that he was filso connected
w.ith this Japanese· and that he had duly reported the fact to
Maryasin. Maryasin had told him that this connection was properly established and that it was approved of by Pyatakov. Therefore (that was what he told me) I consider that there were no
other ways of informing the Japanese wh-0 !belonged to the Trotskyite -0rganization.
Braude: Did you have any meetings with Mr. H - - himself
after your conversation with that representative of Mr. H--?
Knyazev: In April 1935 I received a letter from Mr. H--.
The President: Citizen Knyazev, I think you ought to know how
to refer to this representative of the Japanese government. In the
indictment he is referred to as Mr. H--. Why do you trip up
on this every time?
Knyazeu: It is very harr-<l.
The President: Try to remember.
Knyazev: Very well. I received this letiter from Japan; from
Mr. H-.-, in which he wrote that he was going Tu London on
diplomatic business and asked me to meet him when l'ie--passed
through Sverdlovsk. This I did. In Sverdlovsk I received a telegram saying what train he was travelling on and giving the number of the train. I went to Sverdlovsk to meet him but first I went
to Turok and asked him 'vhether he knew that this Japanesj Mr.
H - - was coming. Turok said that he knew about it, but since
a meeting in the train was not a very convenient matter, Turok
refused to go, as everyone knev. •. him, and we agreed that I would
go an.d meet him personally. I met Mr. H - - on the train in his
compartment. In our conversation Mr. H - - told me that he
well knew of my connections with the Trotskyite organization and
that the Trotskyite organization was now carryingori activity in
the Soviet Union with the assistance of Japan. "\Ve," he said,
"help each other, consequently what we shall ask from you is
nothing more than a r~turn for the help which we render the
Trotskyite organization."
,
He also told me that undermiding work did not satisfy the Japanese and that it was necessary to undertake ads of diversion, espe376

dally with Tegard to troop trains bound for the Far East, in order
to demoralize the Red Army. As a ma,tter of fact, the activities outl!Iied by l\fr. H-- were later confirmed by Livshitz.
The Japanese described this as pursuing the object of demoralizing the army when it moves to the East, whereas the Trotskyite
organization describes this diversive work as undermining tht'
authority of Stalin and the Party leadership, inciting the people
against the Party and thus rousing anger among the people, although I must say frankly that this anger was roused, not against
the Party, and not against Stalin, tbut against those who engaged
in wrecking trains.
Braude: Thus, you engineered train wrecks upon the instructions of the Japanese intelligence iService and of Livshitz, the Assistant People's Commissar of Railways.
Knyazev: Yes.
Braude: Did you report on what you carried out to any one
of ycmr superiors or to both at once?
.
Knyazev: After I had established connections with Livshitz
I mostly followed the instructions Livshitz gave me, because he
had the mosrt authority for me.
Brau.de: But you also reported to the Japanese?
Knyazev: Yes.
Braude: Briefly tell us about yourself. Who was your father?'
Knyazev: My father came of peasant stock. He worked for
hire all his life.
Braude: Your father was a coachman, and your mother worked
on a farm?
Knyazev: Yes.
Braude: Where did you work?
Knyazev: In the first years I was a tailor and a carpenter, theft
·-at4he age of 20 I went to '\York on the railways, and beginning as
a clerk I rose to the post of chief of a railway line and assistant
chief of a Central Administration of the People's Commissariat
of Railways.
Vyshinsky: You were a tailor at one time?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you have your own workshop?
Knyazev: No.
·
Vyshinsky: But a card of yours was found with the inscription
"Knyazev, taifor." ·what is the meaning of that?
Knya::ev: That was merely a card, nothing more. I was 20
years old then.
Vyshinsky: You had no workshop?
Knyazev: No.
377

Vyshinsky: And how did you, a tailor, happen to become a
railwayman?

Knya.zev: At the age of 20 I was taken on at the Vspolye station
as a car recorder. During this time, beginning with 1917, when I
returned from the army. . . .
·
Vyshinsky: I must return to a number of questions dealing
with Knyazev's spying activity.
The President:. Have you many questions? Perhaps you will
~llsk them after the ;recess?
Vyshinsky: I relinquished my turn, but I did not relinquish the
interrogation; naturally it will take a good deal of time.
The President: Certainly, but in that case perhaps you will do
jt after the recess?
·
Vyshinsky: As you wish.
The President: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*

*

*

Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: Comrade Vyshinsky, have you any questions?
Vyshinsky: I want to go back to the train wrecks. You men~
tioned here quite a number of cases of wrecking. The train wreck
-0n February 7, 1936, on the Yedinover-Berdyaush section was
.carried out on your instructions?
Knyazev: Yes.
· VyshiRsky: Was anyone prosecuted for that train wreck?
Knyazev: I think not, except for the fact of a reprimand.
Vyshinsky: No one was prosecuted?
Rnyazeu: No; no one.
Vyshinsky: Why?
"""
Knyazev: As I have already said, all the traces were eove:ted
up, to put it plainly, in railway traditions. . . .
Vyshinsl.:y: No, not railway traditions, but criminal, counterrevolutionary activity.
Knyazeu: Railwaymen have a notion that if a rail splits no~
one on the road is to blame.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, they attribute it to objective causes?
Knyazev: They did not find the culprits.
Vyshinsky: Have they found them now?
Knyazev: Now they have found them.
Vyshinsky: \Vho was to blame?
En~7a::ev: I was.
Vyshinsky: How about the wreck on the Yakhino- Ust-Katav
section?
Knya::.ev: The same thing.
Vyshinsl.:y: On your instl'Uctions?
/'
Knyazev: Yes.
378

Vyshinsky: \Vas anyone prosecuted?
Knyazev: No one was prosecuted.
l'yshinsky: For the same reasons?
Knyazev: For the same reasons.
Vyshinsky: It was covered up?
Knyazev: Exactly.
Vyshinsky: On February 27 there was a train wreck at Chistaya
Chmnlyak station; was that also on your :instrudiions?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Your organization?
Knyazev: Our organization.
Vyshinsky: Was anyone prosecuted?
Knyazev: I believe not.
Vyshinsky: It was covered up?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You covered it up?
Knyazev: It was not I who covered it up.
Vyshinsky: Who was the chief of the line?
· Knyazev: It was covered up by those who conducted the investigation.
Vy~hinsky: Who was the chief of the line?
Knyazev: Knyazev.
Vyshinsky: There is an order to the effect that the chief of
.the line himself must igo to the scene of the train wreck and investigate.
Knyazev: My assistant went.
Vyshinsky: But there was nothing for you to investigaite. You
knew all about it?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Then, there was a train wreck at Logovushka station in ·1936. Was anyone prosecuted?
Knyazev: I believe that a foreman was removed for a short time.
Vyshinsky: As regards criminal prosecution?
Knyazev: No.
·vyshinsky: It was covered up?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: It was concealed?
.
Knyazev: Y.es.
l'yshinsky: \Vas the train.wreck on May 13, 1936, on the RosaVargashi section also on your instructions?
Knyazev: Yes, I already spoke of it.
Vyshinsky: \Vere the actual culprits or anyone else prosecuted?
Knyazev: I believe Nikolayev, a foreman, was prosecuted.
Vgslzinsky: \Vas he tried?
Knyazev: He was tried.
379

Vyshinsky: \Vas he to blame?
Knyazev: No.
Vyshinsky: Did you have a hand 1n that matter?
Knyazev: I did.
Vyshinsky: So an innocent man \Vas tried?
K,nyazev: I don't remember,. I. . . .
Vyshinsky: That means you not only organized train wreoks
that caused loss of human life, but you framed innocent people
like Chudinova, like the enginc-dr,iver Fedorov. You shuffled the
facts of the evidence and put innocent men on trial. Is that right?
Knyazev: As far as I know the engine-driver Fedorov was not
tried in that ca>Se.
Vyshinsky: As far as I know, he was tried.
Knyazev: Nikolayev and Andreyev were tried.
Vyshinsky: The whole blame was laid on Fedorov?
Knyazev: It was.
Vyshinsky: That's just what I am say1ng. On January 18, 1936,
the wreck of train No. 910 at Chumlyak station was engineered--0n
your inslrudions?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: By members of your organization?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinskg: Were criminal proceedings instituted against anyone?
Knyazev: I believe an engine-driver was prosecuted.
Vyshinsky: No one was prosecuted?
Knyazev: Gre-ine, I believe, was 'Prosecuted. ..
Vyshinskg: As far as I know no one was prosecuted because
you and your accomplices presented tile matter as though objec~
tive causes were responsible and no one was to blame.
Knyazev: I cannot :;i.ffirm that.
Vyshinsky: But you can a.fflrm the previous cases?
Knyazev: Yes.
#
Vyshinsky: That means that we may draw the following conclusion: you not only organized train wrecks, but taking advantage of your position as chief of the line, you deliiberately fabricated incorrect documents which misled the investigating organs and
the courts. Is that right?
. .
Knyazev: Citizen Procurator, I think I hav~_r:ep_Iied to everything, and have spoken clearly, I do not deny things. · -Vyshinsky: This "everything" does not satisfy me. I do not
want "everything," I want each one separately. "Everything" will
be said by the Court in its verdict. At present, the case is being
tried, and "everything" is not enough for me. Am I right?
Knya::.ev: Quite right.
380

Vyshinsky: In a number of caises, -some of which have been
mentioned now, you acted in a criminal manner in order to hide
the real culprits, in order to lay the blame on individuals who
were actually not to blame. Is that right or is it not?
Knyazeu: It is quite right. I ean _add that the underlying purpose of all the undennining activities was not the purpose which
Serebryakov spoke of here, it was aimed at onganizing a disruption of transportation and organizing lhe causes. I cannot understand why Livshitz is silent and Serebryakov continues to decehre
the Supreme Court.
Vyshinsky: Don't .get indiignant over Serebryakov. Just at present we are discussing your crime. Were you chief of the South
Ura1s Line throughout 1935, at the time when the train wrecks
occurred?
Knyazeu: Yes, until October 1936.
Vyshinsky: Is it true that in 1935, 46 persons were killed and
51 were injured in train disasters which you o:riganized? Do you
confirm these figures?
·
Knyazeu: That is correct.
Vyshinsky: And in 1936, 17 persons were killed and 103 injured?
Knyazeu: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Total: 63 persons kiHed ;and 154 injured in train
disasters whicil you personally organized?
Knyazev: Not personaftly, but most of them were connected
with the activities of our Trotskyite organization.
Vyshinsky: Most of them, did you keep count of them?
Knyazeu: No.
Vyshinsky: The fig.ures I have mentioned, are they probable?
Knyazeu: I confirm them.
·
Vyshinsky: Now, as regards connections with the Japane~ intelligence service. And so you saw George or "Georgi Ivanovich"
in 1935 and Mr.-- in. . . .
Knyazev: I saw Mr. H - - in May, and in December I s::,,"Georgi I vanovich."
Vyshinsky: Is he the same as George or is that someone else?
Knyazeu: The same.
Vyshinsky: And in 1936?
Knyazev: In 1936 I saw "'Georgi Ivanovich" and Mr. H--.
Vyshinsky: I ask that the accused be called to or<ler.
The President: Accused Knyazev, I call you to order for the
fourth time, I warn you not to mention names.
Knyazeu: It's th~t letter H .... If you only used some other
letter.
/'
.
Vyshinsky: If you are worried by the surname Ii--, then
381

call him X. This l\fr. X met you in 1936 as you said in reply to
the question of your counsel?
Knyazev: Yes, on October 23, 1936.
Vyshinsky: The same Mr. X that tried to recruit you in 1931 '!
Knyazev: That's right.
Vysllinsky: You refused?
Knyazev: I refused.
Vyshinsky: Why did you refuse?
Knyazev: Because if I had not subsequently become involved
in the Trotskyite struggle I would never have formed connections
with the Japanese.
Vyshinsky: That means that you became connected with the
Japanese as a member of the Trotskyite organization, that is, not
because of your individual personal character, but carrying out
a definite policy?
Knyazev: That's right.
Vyshinsky: In 1936 you corresponded with this Mr. X?
f{nyazev: In AugusJ I received a letter from Mr. X. He wrote
that. . . .
Vyshinsky: Did he say in that letter that he wanted to see you?
Knyazev: He did.
Vyshinsky: Did he say in that letter that he wanted to see you
in Moscow?
Knyazev: He did.Vyshinsky: Did he not say in that letter that he hoped that an
opportunity would soon present itself?
Knyazev: He did.
"""
Vyshinsky: Thus, he wrote you that he wanteo to_~new his
meetings with you?
·
Knyazev: Yes, renew them.
Vyshinsky.: Did he write that he was coming to Moscow to
work in a certain institution of his government?
Knyazev: Yes.
I
Vyshinsky: He wrote you all that?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did he write that he expected an answer from you
soon?
Knyazev: Yes.
.
Vyshinsky: Did you receive such a letter?
Knyazev: I did.
Vyshinsky: Did you keep the letter?
Knyazev: No, I did not keep it. When I received it I left it in
my desk drawer.
Vyshinsky: It disappeared?
Knyazev: It disappeared from my .desk.
382

Vyshinsky: We have a certified photostat of that letter that
was taken at the time from your desk. I ask the Court to bear this
out. I would like this photostat to be shown to the accused Knyazev.
Let him say whether he recognizes the handwriting of Mr. X.
Accused Knyazev, the full name beginning with the letter H is
written there, so that you will kindly forget about it; and it also
contains the address. Kindly do not mention it. Tell us whether
that is the letter, whether that is the handwriting.
Knyazev (examining the photostat of the letter): Yes, that is it.
Can I mention the telephone number?
Vyshinsky: The telephone number? 'What for? You aren't
going to talk to him by phone now.· You seem to have acquired
a sort of conditioned reflex.
And here is an original letter dated December 15, addressed to
you-to Comrade I. A. Knyazev: "I would very much like you to
send me . . . " etc. . .. "My best wishes." Signature. On the
right side is an annotation in the language of the nation to which
the writer belongs. Is it your annotation or his annotation?December 15.
·
'Vhat year does the letter belong to and do you likewise recognize the writing of this Mr. X? (He hands a letter to the members of the Court. Then the Commandant hands the letter -0ver
to the accused Knyazev who examines it.)
Knyazev: If I remember rightly it h,?longs to 1931.
Vyshinsky: This letter was in your possession?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You kept it from 1931?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Out of carelessness?
Knyazev: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: Why did you not destroy it?
Knyazev: I do not know.
Vyshinsky: It got stuck away somewhere among papers?
Knyazev: In a book somewhere.
Vyshinsky: And how did it happen to be in a book?
Knyazev: Obviously I read it and stuck it there.
Vyshinskg: So that now we may consider that we have documentary confirmation of your activity in conjunction with Mr. X,
not only based on your testimony and on the testimony of Turok
but also on the documents now in our possession.
_
Did these gentlemen give you instructions on what to do in
case of war?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshins;y: Through whom? Through "Georgi"?
Knyazev: Through "Georgi Ivanovich." And then in October
383

1936 when I met Mr. X here in Moscow he again told me that
"evidently you deliberately do not want to prepare for anything
and in the first place we set you the task of preparing cadres for
wartime so that by means of these cadres it will be possible to
-0rganize a number of diversive acts during the movement of troop
trains bound for the Far East."
Vyshinsky: And he spoke to you about arranging to set fire
to military depots in case of war?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did he mention anything else to be done in case of
war"?
Knyazev: Yes, we h~d a long conversation. Allow me to seCit
forth in detail.
Vysh'insky: No, we wiil have a long talk a!bout it at the session
in camera, but for the present answer briefly, did ihe mention anything else to .be done in the event of war?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What was it you talked about?
Knyazev: About setting fire to mi~itary depots, about setting fire
to the supply points for troop trains and as far as I remember, in
October, when my conversation with Mr. X took plaee, he strongly stressed the necessity that '.'we not only set the task of merely
~using fires, but if necessary, of even contaminating the cars
which are assigned for the transport of military detachments."
Vyshinsky: Contaminating with what?
Knyazev: Bacteria.
Vyshinsky: What bacteria?
Knyazev: He told me that they would provide tffese means.
Vyshinsky: But what were they to be used for?
Knyazev: To contaminate the troop cars.
Vyshinsky: To infect them?
Knyazev: Yes, to infect them.
Vyshinsky: The troop trains and canteens?
Knyazev: And points of embarkation.
Vyshinsky: But .sanitary treatment was mentioned here.
Knyazev: That's just what I am saying, before the trOQps are
embarked. The cars are made ready 24 hours abead of time, at
specific points where they are washed with hot water and then
-dried, and in the course of this sanitary treatment. . .
Vyshinsky: That is to say, they are cleaned?
-- -· - - ·
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And what must you do?
Knyazev: Infect them.
Vyshinsky: And then fill those cars with people, infect the
people, so that they will giet sick and die?
884

Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Mr. X proposed this to you?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: He promised to provide the bacteria at the proper
time?
Knyazev: Yes.
\-'yshinsky: What was the gist of his conversation with you
regarding the event of war, at that time?
Knyazev: According to data in his possession, war between
Japan an<l the U.S.S.R. is inevitaible. . . .
Vyshinsky: When?
Knyazev: He did not mention a definite date.
Vyshinsky: Approximately when?
Knyazev: I figured in 1937.
Vyshinsky: In the near or distant future?
Knyazev: In the near future.
Vyshinsky: He prepared you and the whole Trotskyite espionage organization w help them?
Knyazev: Not only through me, he evidently had extensive
connections.
.
Vyshinsky: He had other connections besides you?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And did he inform you of the purpose?
Knyazev: For the purpose of properly organizing forces for
Trotskyite destructive activities. He emphasized that these forces
were extremely weak.
Vyshinsky: Where were you working then?
Knyazev: I was in Che[yabinsk in December and in 1936 I
was transferred to Moscow, to the Traffic Department.
\.'yshinsky: ·when did this conversation take place?
Knyazev: In 1936, when I was working in Moscow.
Vyshinsky: What post did you hold?
Knyazev: Assistant chief of the Central Traffic Department.
Vyshinsky: Had you many levers in your hands for the carrying out of your criminal designs?
Knyazev: \Vhen I was transferred to the People's Commissariat
of Railways, I had fewer levers, bec;mse I was not connected with
the lower personnel, but regardless of this my organization on
the line remained.
·
Vyshinsky: Tell me, what department is in charge of servicing
cars in operation for the run?
Knyazev: The traffic and rolling stock divisions.
Vyshinsky: It does concern the traffic division?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vgshinsky: And you were assistant chief of the traffic division?
385

Knyazev: Of the department.
Vyshinsky: Through the department you managed the service
on the road?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That means that this was directly related to your
official duties?
Knyazev: Partly.
Vyshinsky: Who was chief of the traffic division?
Knyazev: Golovin.
Vyshin"sky: He also t_ook part?
Knyazev: No.
Vyshinsky: Who took part among your subordinates?
Knyazev: The forces on the spot.
Vyshinsky: "\Vas Serebryakov concerned in this matter?
Knyazev: I do not know whether Serebryakov was or not, since
this conversation was in 1935-'.--at the time I was concerned with
various data which, as Livshitz confirmed, had been handed over
to me. I .told him then that the Japanese were after us to get ready
· f9r wartime.
·
Vyshinsky: Did Serebryakov say that?
Knyazev: No, it was Livshitz.
Vyshinsky: I am asking you, did you learn it from Serebryakov?
Knyazev: No.
Vyshinsky: A few minutes ago you said that you w.ere indignant
because Serebryakov and Livshitz. . . . What made you indignant? Or what d'o you know of Serebryakov's activities in connection with the matter which caused your iru:lignation?
Knyazev: I say that Serebryakov stated in his testimony thaf
increase of empty runs was resorted to as a means of sabotage,
that is, he mentioned the least important means. I do not believe
that Serebryakov was unaware of more effective means, which
vitally damaged communications.
1
Vyshinsky: YO'U know that he knew?
Knyazev: I am convinced.
Vyshinsky: Your convictions are of little interest to us; have
you any facts?
Knyazev: No. But to me Livshitz was always quoting the leading centre and in 1936, in April, when we met, Livshitz spoke of
the existence--excuse me, it was in 1935-he--spoke of-the existence of a parallel centre composed of Pyatakov, Radek, Sereb-i
ryakov. Consequently, since he sa~<l that he was connected with.;
this centre, and received leading instructions from it. I cons.idered J
that he knew. These instruitions were fomrnlated with precisionj;
by Livshitz and they were lianded down from above in this form •.
386

•

Vyshinsky: That means Livshitz was the source of your information?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You know nothing directly, except for the general
understanding that Serebryakov and Livs:hitz are the leaders?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You admitted yesterday that you received 15,000
rubles through Turok from the Japanese intelligence .service.
Knyazev: Yes.
·
Vyshinsky: Why did this money have to be handed over
through Turok and not directly? Perhaps you also received some
directly?
Knyazev: No.
Vyshinsky: Why? Would it have been awkward for you?
Knyazev: This is not the place to appeal to ethics.
Vyshinsky: What have ethics to do with it?
Knyd.zev: I believe that inasmuch as Turok had his connections
in this respect. . . .
·
Vyshinsky: Inasmuch as, and whereas and so forth. You were
connected with Mr. H--, you were connected with "Georgi Ivanovich." \Vere you connected with the Japanese intelligence service?
Knyazev: I was.
Vyshinsky: The Japanese intelligence service paid its agents?
_Knyazev: I do not know w:hether it paid its agents.
Vyshinsky: Did it pay Turok?
Knyazev: It did not pay Turok personally, but it paid the Trotskyite organization.
_
Vyshinsky: Again personally or not personaUy. No accounts
were kept. He took money, put it in his pocket, paid it out or
did not pay it out-that is unimportant. What is important is that
they paid, and What stayed in your pocket was between you and
your conscience, so to speak.
Knyazev: I categorically object to that.
Vyshinsky: I am asking you, did the intelligence service pay
money to its agents for the Trotskyite organization, or was it for
the agents personally?
Knyazev: Evidently.
Vyshinsky: Did you know of such cases?
Knyazev: Only as regards what I got from Turok and nothing
·more.
Vysilinsky: You yourself got money from Turok. The question
.occurs to me why did you have to be paid through Turok and why
:;could not MT. H - - pay you personally, or through "George."
L; Knyazev: I think, simply, that their connections were formed
!'iearlier and in this respect were more direct.

r

~7

Vysbinsky: That means that you think the financial side was
centralized and went through the "minister of finance" Turok?
Knyazev: I do not think the financial side was concentrated
in Turok's hands.
Vyshinsky: Uut in whose hands?
Knyazev: Higher up, I dare say.
Vyshinsky: In the hands of t'he former People's Commissar of
Finance perhaps? .
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In Sokolnikov's hands?
Knyazev: No. Sokolnikov possibly..
Vyshinsky: Where else? In Pyatakov's hands?
Knyazev: No. I don't know who of those higher up was directly
connected with the Japanese government, although I tried to find
that out many times.
·
Vyshinsky: They didn't tell you. But will you tell us what you
do know? Do you know Turok?
Knyazev: I do.
Vyshinsky: Turok received money?
Knyazev: He received it once.
Vyshinsky: He gave you some?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: It srem.s strange to me that they didn't hand the
money over to you personally, directly.
Knyazev: I cannot even explain that.
Vyshinsky: You cannot give explanations? Perhaps you yourself received some more?
Knyazev: No.
~
Vyshinsky: And perhaps you had occasion to be wined -and
dined at the expense of ~Ir. H-- or of someone else.
Knyazev: No. No.
Vysliinsky: Never?
Knyazev: Never. And when· I was in Japan the question wlll'
raised not by Mr. H-- but by the Japanese government.
;
Vyshinsky: Kindly leaV'e the government out of it. ·what has:;
the government got to do with it? \Ve are dealing with certairij
gentlemen. How did you us.e the 15,000? Will you give us an ac-~
.count of how you used the 15,000, ruble for ruble?
'
Knyazev: That is recorded in my testimony.
··
Vyshinsky: Plenty of other things are also recordea1n-the t timony. I would like to have this brought out in court.
Knyazev: I gave 4,500 to Dolmatov.
Vyshinsky: How did he spend them?
Knyazev: I cannot say.
Vyshinsky: Perhaps Dolmatov kept the money?
388

Knyazev: I don't think so.
Vyshinsky: \Vhy? ls he an honest man?
Knyazev: It is not that he is honest. . . .
Vyshinsky: Is he honest or dishonest?
Knyazev: I knew him as a man who was not prompted by
personal interests.
Vyshinsky: Personal inierest is one thing, but ethics, which
you mentioned, are something else.
Knyazev: But money is a personal interest.
Vyshinsky: No, it's broader than p€rsonal interest. Very well,
then, 4,500 to Dolmatov. Who else?
Knyazev: Next 4,000 to Levin.
Vyshinsky: So, that means 8,500. And then?·
Knyazev: Next 2,500 to Sherlbin.
Vyshinsky: Well, and then?
Knyazev: 4,QOO to Bochkarev.
Vyshinsky: And is that all?
Knyazev: That is all.
Vyshinsky: And you had no organizational exp€nses?
Knyazev: All my organizational wor:k was conduct·ed thrnugh
these individuals, I had no other channels.
Vyshinsky: How were they to spend' the money?
Knyazev: As remuneration in certain cases, as pay for those
individuals who were drawn into undermining activities.
· Vyshinsky: As remuneration?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is, as a bribe?
Knyazev: Quite right.
Vyshinsky: For example?
I\nyazev: Since a considerable part of the forces had nothing
in common with the Conununist Partv.
Vyshinsky: That's dear.
•
Knyazev: Even as far as their past was concerned. They were
people who were forme11ly connected with the kulaks or the old
specialists.
Vyshinsky: And with wnom else?
Knyazev: 'With Kolchak elements.
Vyshinsky: And with whom else_?
Knyazev: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: And how about such typ€s as the accused
Arnold?
Knyazev: Well, you know, he is a rare masterpiece.
·' Vyshinsky: \Vith what types were you connected?
, Knyf:izev: In my opinion, typ€s like Arnold you can only finu
'One in ten million.
389

Vyshinsku: Not very many. But nevertheless, as the saying
;goes, "birds of a feather flock together."
Kngazev: That's how it turns out.
Vyshinshy: That means that somebody had to be bribed. Was
that what the money went for?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you take any personally?
Knyazev: Personally, I didn't require it, I was getting 1,600
rubles. I could not even do that, otherwise the secrecy o.f the organization would :have been exposed.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen Mr. X sai<l to you, "Give me certain information," and this was information of an espionage nature, did he
offer you money?
Knyazev: I did not take any money.
Vyshinsky: Didn't he say that certain expenses might arise for
which they would pay you?
Knyazev: He said to me: bear in mind that we are giving a lot
of assistance to the Trotskyite organization.
Vysl1insky: He said fihat?
Knyazev: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What assistance?
.· Knyazev: Ffoandal, material.
Vyshinsky: That means that you discussed with Mr. X the
fact that the intelligence service was furnishing financial aid. Did
you have such a conversation?
Knyazev: The way I understood it, they helped financially and
in the preparation of forces.
.
Vyshinsky: You were just now saying that Mr. X toTd you that
ihey helped the Trotskyites materially.
- -...
Knyazev: No; not materially, but they helped. You see, he
said: \Ve are helping the Trolskyites a great deal.
Vyshinsky: And how djd you interpret this?
Knyazev: I understood that this was partially in the form ,of
financial aid.
Vyshinsky: Hence, we may consider it established that you
carried on conversations with !\fr. X about monev and material
aid, which must be interpreted as financial aid? ·
Knyazev: I repeat, Citizen Procurator, that there was no discnssion of personal monev matters, but what he said to me was
fhat they arc helping the. TrotskyitPs a great deal. Fimdersto6d
that this meant partly material aid.
Vyshinsky: And partly financial aid?
Kngazev: Quite right
Vy.~hins.ky: Consequently,. the· w9rk was paid for.
Rnyn:ev: Yes.
390

Vyshinsky: And you did not ask where material aid could be
obtained?
·
Knyazeu: This question was of little interest to me.
Vyshinsky: Why?
Knyazev: Because I had little occasion to resort to that; the
funds which Turok supplied me with were adequate.
Vyshirnky: Not for yourself, but for the organization?
Knyazev: 'Dhe funds whic:h. Turok. gave me in 1935 were
enough to cover o"Dganizational expernses.
· Vyshinsky: The conversation with.Mr. X took place after you
received the money from Turok, or before?
Knyazev: After.
l'yshinsky: And did you say that assistance was being given?
Knyazev: No, I put the question to him differently.
Vyshinsky: How?
Knyazev: He said to me: as we see it you do not sufficiently
utilize your official position to enable us to receive what we expect
from you, you do not consciously .utilize it, and1 I ·am convinced
that evidently you simJJ'ly do not want to understand that we arc
helping your organization a great deal and that your influential
members are in close contact with our Japanese government.
Vyshinsky: Again you bring that up. I am asking about money:
Knyazev: We only spoke of money in the form that I men'tioned.
Vyshinsky: But you did not tell him that you had received a
~ertain amount of money and distributed it to this and that organization?
·
Knyazev: No, I said that 1 would do everything in my power
and that I had no other means whert:lby to satisfy their demands.
Vyshinsky: You justified yourself like a diplomat?
Knyazev: Of course. I am not a diplomat, that's why I either
kept quiet or gave a wrong reply.
Vyshinsky: But you nevertheless carried on diplomatic con~
versations?
Knyazeu: That is true.
Vysh'insky: You confirm that you received nothing besides the
15.000?
" Knyazev: Not a thing.
Vyshinsky: And those 15,'000 did not burn your fingers?
Knyazev: They did.
Vyshinsky: But this did not hinder you?
Knyazev: If you combine this with wrecking and high treason,
why....
·
Vyshinsky: Your counsel asked who you are; you answered:
"the son of a peasant."
'391

Knyazev: Yes, that is quite right.
Vysliinskg: That is not right. I have no more questions.
The President: Have Counsel any questions?
Brmzde: No questions.
Tbe President: Accused Knyazev, please sit down.
_
Knyazev: I would like to make a number of other statements..
The President: You may do so in your defence plea.
Knyazev: I do .not want the Citizen Procurator to accuse me
of having withheld anything. I woukl like to tell about what J;
know of Livshitz's connections and about my last meeting with
Mr. X.
The President: By way of supplement to what has already
been said?
Knyazev: Yes.
The President: You may.
Knyazev: I confirm that when I met Yakov Abramovich Livshitz in 1935 he told me at the time that a seri()!lls Trotskyite organization was in existence on the railways. In particular he mentioned Mironov, Zoriri and Mirsky. As for the other responsible
functionaries whom I heard mentioned yester<lay during his testimony-Fufryansky, Rosenzweig and Arnoldov-I had not heard
af these individuals from Mm. I heard him mention them yester. day for the first time. That is the first point. In the second place,
in 1936, when we had our second conversation he told me that he
had learnt from tlie parallel centre that between those higher up in
the Trotskyit•e organization and the Japanese contads---:this has
been definitely proved now-had been established. These contacts
with the Japanese government were now maintained IB;t only by
the middle links (this applied to our circle) but by the leaaingsections of the political organization as weU.
Vyshinsky (to the President): The accused Knyazev persists
in naming the government of a country with which we haveofficial relations. I ask that Knyazev's examination be eith~
transferred to a session in camera or that he stop mentioning in
open court what is not subject to publication.
KnyazeZJ: But I !haven't mentioned any names.
The President:- Accused Knyaz•ev, before you started giving evi-·
dence I warned you not to speak on questions which must be
discussed in camera.
Vyshinskg: Perhaps it will be more 'convenient if-Hie examiH"ation in so far as Knyazev is concerned be continued in camera?'
Knyazev: Very well.
The President: We shall proceed to examine the accused·
Turok.
Accused Turok, do you confirm the testimony you gave in.
1

392

December regarding Trotskyite counter-revolutionary and espionage work?
Turok: I do.
Vyshinsky: Since we have already examined Turok length in
the course of the proceedings, I .have no direct questions to put tohim now. Perhaps they will arise as a result of the explanations he
may wish to make; I shall then question him.
The President: So as not to dirag out the examination, perhaps.
a few supplementary questions may be asked'?
Vyshinsky: Very well.
..
The President: Accused Turok, when. and by whom were you
recruited for the Trotskyite anti-Sovi~t b'rganization?
Turok: In 1934, by .the manager of.the Urals Car Construction
Works, Maryasin.
The President: With what duties were you entrusted?
Turok: To form an organization of Trotskyites and of other
elements who might help in the struggle against the Party and thegovernment, for the purpose Qf organizing destructive work on thePerm and Urals Railway.
· ·
The President: What was your position at the time?
Tu.rok: Assistant manager of the Traffic Department.
The President: What work did you have to perform during
recent years afong the lines of the Trotskyite organization?
Turok: I re~ruited a number of persons: Burlakov, Meyerson
and Doli:natov.
The President: Did all the persons named by you immediately
give their consent to work in the Trotskyite counter-revolutionary
organization, or not?
Turok: Each of the persons whom I recruited had for two or
three months spoken to me in a counter-revolutionary spirit, and'
it,-was on this basis that I enlisted them.
The President: From whom personally did you receive instructions to perform Trotskyite anti-Soviet wrecking work on the
railways?
Turok: From Maryasin. In March 1935 I received confirmation
of our wrecking and undermining work from Pyatakov, who visited
Sverdlovsk at the time. On September 14, 1935, I attended a meeting
of the commission of the Pe&ple's Commissariat of Railways sit• ting in Moscow to endorse th~ new train schedule. On September
15 Livshitz called me into his office and told me that wrecking
, and undermining work ·must now consist of disrupting the new
train schedule. In addition to ca,using the railways to work badly?
this would affect the wages of the workers and would discredit the:
leadership of Kaganovkh.

at

393

The President: Did Livshitz give you any concrete instructions
to organize accidents?

Turok: Yes. He said that it \VOu1d be a good thing to organize
train accidents involving loss of life.
The President: Did he stress this?
Turok: Yes.
The President:. Did you not inquire why loss of life should
necessarily he involved?
Turok: I <lid not inquire because I was told the same thing
in greater detail by Maryasin, who gave as a reason that it was
necessary in order to arouse resentment against the government.
The President: Mter these instructions were given by Maryasin,
LivLShitz and Pyatakov, did the number of acci<lents caused by
your organization increase on your railway?
Turok: I cannot give the figures just now, of course, but at any
t"ate a number of serious accidents to freight trains and one passenger train was organized by us.
The President: How many train accidents were deliberately
<>rganized by members of your Trotskyite organfaation?
Turok: I know of approximately 40.
The President: During what period of time?
Turok: From the end of 1934 to the day of my arrest.
The President: Were anv lives lost?
Turok: yes; C·hiefly. among the crews. of the freight trains, but
·also in the case of the passenger train.
The President: How many lives were lost then?
Turok: _One was killed, five seriously injured and f}fteen slight·
1y injured.
_ ..._
The President: When <lid your last meeting with Livshitz take
-place?
·
Turok: A meeting at which counter-revolutionary matters
were discussed took place in 1935, in September.
The President: \Vas that the last?
~
Turok: No, I met him afterwards, but casually.
The President: Did your counter-revolutionary Trotskyite organization engage in preparations for terrorist acts?
Turok: Yes. In the autumn of 1934 Molotov was to have passed
through Sverdlovsk, and Burlakov, a member of the Trotskyite
organization who was connected with Mrachkovsky., p-ers()i:i~lly
-prepared to commit a terrorist act against Molotov, but it did not
come off.
I learned from Buriakov that he had prepared to commit a
terrorist act against Kaganovich too in February 1936. He enlisted
Mikhetko~ who was a Japanese agent, as immediate executant of
lhis terrorist ad.
·
394

The President: Do you confirm your testimony about your
<:onnedions with Japanese agents, Mr. H--, Mr. U-- and
"Georgi Ivanovich"?
Turok: I do.
The President: Do you confirm everything stated in the testimony you gave in January?
Turok: I do.
Tl1e President: How much money <lid you receive for the work
you performed on behalf of the Japanese intelligence service?
Turok: In February 1935 they brought me 35,000 rubles. . . .
The President: Well, what next? From whom?
Turok: I had been told beforehand by "Georgi Ivanovich," who
maintained contaet with me, that I would receive this ffit)ne-y.
The President: How did you distribute this money?·
Turok: I gave 15,000 rubles to Knyazev.
The President: Do your testimonies agree?
Turok: Yes. Of the remaining money, I gave 4,000 rubles to
Burlakov for the oiiganization of und~nnining work.
The President: A terrorist?
Turok: Yes. I gave 4,500 rubles to Alexin, 3,000 rubles to Naumov, 1,500 rubles to Meyerson and 1,500 rubles to Bondarenko.
The President: We have no more questions. Comrade Vyshinsky, have you any questions?
Vyshinsky: You spoke of a train accident in which one person
was killed, five seriously injured, antl slightly injured. . . ?
Turok: Fifteen.
The President: Twenty in all?
Turok: Yes.
Vyshinsky: This was on April 26, 1936?
-Turok: Yes.
Vyshinsky: At \vhat station was this, on w11at stretch?
Turok: Between the Sverdlovsk Passenger Station and the
Swrdlovsk Sorting Station.
Vyshinsky: Was it on your instructions?
Turok: Yes, it was. It was carried out by Perrov, sectional road
maintenance chief, and Popov, road master.
Vyshinsky: \Vas Popov sentenced for this?
Turok: He was sentenced to two years' imprisonment ·for
negligence.
Vyshinsky: Why only for negligence?
Turok: Knyazev bas €xplained how investigations are made
on the railways. Everybody tries to throw the blame on others to.
prevent the tr.uth from coming to light. The traffic man will blame
3~5

the maintenance man, the maintenance man the traffic man, only
not to stain one's own uniform.
Vyshinsky: This was done so as to cover up the tracks?
Turok: To cover up the tracks from the point of view of service
discipline, and in cases like these, from the criminal point of view
as well.
Vyshinsky: Was the train disaster- in June 1935 on the SagreJset stretch caused _on your instructions?
Turok: On our instructions.
Vys-hinsky: That is, your instructions and whose else?
Turok: You see, Citizen Prosecutor, I did not give instructions,
for example, to wreck train No. 930, but said ihat a train accident
should be organized. And so when I said "our instructions" there
were the immediate executants and there were intermediaries. It
is in this respect that I say "on our instructions."
Vyshinsky: But you checked up afterwards how your instructions were carried out?
Turok: I have already said in reply to the question of the President that I know of forty cases ....
Vyshinsky: I am not asking how many cases there were, but
what the system was. Did the executa:nts .afterwards report to
you?
Turok: Yes, I knew about the accidents. When any train accident was caused by a member of our organization, I was afterwards informed.
Vyshinsky: Why do I ask this? Certain train wrecks may have
been due to accident. How did you distinguish between a wreck
caused deliberately and a wreck caused by accident?": -- ...._
Turok: Well, for example, Alexin, sectional road maintenance
chief, would come to me and say that such and such a train accident on such and such a stretch was caused by us. I would report
this and regard it as the work of our hands.
Vyshinsky: By way of reporting the results of criminal -ta<:tivity?
Turok: Yes.
Vysliinsky: Was your .group definitely organized? Did you havea party organizer or secretary, or anything like that?
Turok: We did not keep minutes, of course.
Vyshinsky: I am not asking about minutes, but-about the--erganization. Were you not the leader of the organization?
Turok: Yes.
· Vyshinsky: And who appointed you leader of the organization?'
Turok: Maryasin.
Vyshinsky: And what right had he to appoint you leader?
396

Turok: Formally, he had no right to appoint me. But I was a
Trotskvite and he was a Trotskyite, we would talk things over
and he. knew about my counter-revolutionary sentiments.
l-'yshinsky: ·where did he work?
Turok: At the Urals Car Construction \Vorks.
Vyshinsky: \Vas he connected with you along business lines?
Turok: No.
Vyshinsky: How was it then that Maryasin could appoint you,
and not you appoint him, or anybody else? Why?
Turok: Because when I was recruited for the organization by
~faryasin. . . .
Vyshinsky: Did he recruit you?
Turok: Yes. And he told me that there was a centre in Moscow,
a ·member of which was Pyatakov, of whom I knew, and that he,
Maryasin, was Pyatakov's representative here.
Vyshinsky: That is, he cited the authority of Pyatakov?
Turok: Yes, Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: As a member of the centre?
Turok: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Was the accident to train No. 756 on foe stretch
Sverdlovsk Passenger Station-Sverdlovsk Sorting Station in
)larch 1936, which was accompanied by loss of life, organized on
your instructions?
Turok: Yes, on our instructions.
ryshinsky: Did you also make a practice of thro,ving the blame
on innocent persons?
Turok: (Maintains a long silence.)
Vyshinsky: I will remind you of a case: traiin No. 930, at Monzino station, on September 30, 1935.
Turok: Yes, I remember it. Simakov, the assistant station master,
wanted to take advantage of the inexperience of Zayakina, the
woman who attended the switch.
Vyshinsky: Did he lay the blame on her?
Turok: He attempted to, but it did not come off.
l'yshinsky: It did not succeed?
Turok: No.
l'yshinsky: Perhaps it was Zhernov and not Simakov?
Turok: Yes, yes, now I recollect, it was Zhernov.
ryshinsky: Who was he?
Turok: Assistant station master.
l-'yshinsky: That is, such things were practised.
Turok: I remember the case.
Vyslzinsky: I have no more questions to put.
Tlze President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
397

Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)

The President: We shall now proceed to the examination of the
accused Rataichak.
·
Accused Rataichak, do you confirm the testimony given by you
during the preliminary investigation at the Procurator's office?
Rataichak: I do.
Vyshinsky: Accused Rataichak, a few questions of a biographical character. During the interrogation on October 2, in answer to
the question what was your nationality, you said that you were a.
German; in reply to the question what was your native language,
you said that it was German. Why did you state in. questionnaires
relating to the years 1920-22 that you were a Pole and that your
native language was Polish?
·
Rataicb.ak: As a matter of fact, I wrote that I was a Pole ever
since I was a prisoner of war.
Vyshinsky: Wha~ were you when you were taken prisoner?
Rataichak: I was taken prisoner as a soldier of the German
army.
Vyshinsky: And what were you by nationality?
Rataichak: A German. I wrote a "Pole" from purely personal
motives. In the old days the tsarist government looked askance·
on Germans, and I therefore concealed my origin.
Vyshinsky: Consequently, by concealing your German origin
you renounced your nationality?
Rataichak: The tsarist government used to look askance at
Germans.
Vyshinsky: The tsarist government was resp'Onsible for many
things, but was it responsible for the fact that you:---renounced
your nationality?
Rataichak: That has no bearing on the case.
Vyshinsky: Permit me to know what has bearing on the case
and what has not. In general, you should know that it isfthe President who directs the examination in court. I request the President to call the accused to order and to point out that such conduct is impennissible in court.
The President: Accused Rataichak, such a posture is not in
keeping in court.
Vyshinsky: I am not referring to his postur.e... _.
The President: I understand that very well, but I ri:Ouced that
the accused Rataichak had assumed a somewhat peculiar posture.
Rataiclwk: I request it to be noted that I did not adopt any
posture, but merely bent over to hear what was being said.
The President: I warn you that you must give clear and precise answers to the questions put by the Court and the Procurator.
398

Rataichak: I replied that this had no. bearing on the case because I considered that the reference to the tsarist government in
connection with my biography had no bearing on the case.
The President: If the Procurator or the President of the Court
put questions, they have a reason for doing so. Be good enough to
answer the questions as put.
·
·
·
Vyshinsky: That is, you wanted to deceive the tsarist government?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: When you joined the Communist Party, you.
deceived it, eoncealed the fact that you were a German.
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Can you explain why?
Rataichak: It was without any self-seeking ends.
Vyshinsky: It may have been without self-seeking ends, but
there may have been other ends. How do you explain it?
Rataichak: Just as I filled in fae questionnaires at first, sothey remained.
Vyshinsky: Why during the preliminary investigation, in answer to the question, how do you explain that you deceived the
Party by stating that your native language was Polish, you replied
that you could not explain it?
- Rataichak: I can be more specific. I wrote in the questionnaire~
that I was a German and that my native language was Polish.
Vyshinsky: Permit me to read what Rataichak testified at the
preliminary investigation, Vol. XVII, p. 24. In reply to the question,
why in the questionnaires relating to 1920-22 you said that you_
were a Pole and that your native language was Polish, you replied
that this was not true. In answer to the question, what induced
you to deceive the Party and to write what was not true about
your nationality, you replied that you could not explain it. Was.
this so?
Rataichak: I confirm it.
Vyshinsky: Was there any other false information in the questionnaires?
Rataichak: I wrote something else in the questionnaires that
was inexact. I stated that I had. taken part in the revolutiona<ry
movement since 1915. As a matter of fact, this was not so.
Vyshinsky: 'Where was that?
Rataichak: In my home country at the time.
Vyshinsky: When?
Rataichak: Before the revolution, in 1915.
Vyshinsky: And <luring the revolution?
Rataichak: I wrote that I was an agitator at the time when r
399

was still not a member of the Party. As a matter of fact, nobody
-assigned me to this work. I worked among prisoners of war, but
I could not call myself an agitator.
Vyshinsky: Did you state in the questionnaire that you were
:an agitator in prisoner-of-war camps?
Rataichak: I did.
Vyshinsky: You said in the questionnaire that you were an
:agitator. You wrote: "Immediately after the October Revolution
I joined a Red Guard detachment which had been formed." And
:you go on to write: "This does not conform to the truth."
Rataichak: I remember that after the October Revolution.
Vyshinsky: Did you give such testimony?
Rataichak: I did.
Vyshinsky: I request to have handed to the accused Rataichak
lhe testimony signed by him (Vol. XVII, p. 25, October 2). I will
.read what is written there: "I am obliged to confess that when
'filling up the questionnaire and writing my autobiography I falsely stated that during the October Revolution I was a:n agitator in
prisoner-of-war camps. I also made a false statement regarding the
dissolution of the prisoner-of-war camps. In my autobiography
it is slated: 'Immediately after the October Revolution . . .'"
Then it goes om to say what I have just read. And then you said:
"'this does not conform to the truth." Were you asked this, did
_you say this, d·id you write this, did you sign this?
Rataichak: I do not deny this fact. I confirm it.
Vysbinsky: That is, it was untrue?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That settles the question.
You write: "I wrongly stated that in Germany in 1913 I was
appointed member of the district committee of the Metal Workers'
Union." Did you state this?
Rataiclwk: I ·did.
Vyshinsky: Was it falSe?
Rataichak: No, I was the secretary.
Vyshinsky: Elected secretary?
Rataichak: No.
Vyshinsky: You just worked as a hired employee?
Rataichak: No. I was working as a fitter in a Ia.dory·. Twas
-co-opted and invited to work as secretarv in the district Metal
'Yorkers' Union.
•
Vyshinsky: But in general the post of secretary in the union
was an elected one?
1,
1
Rataichak: It was.

---

400

Vyshinsky: You stated: "I did not occupy any elected posts
in the Metal \Vorkers' Union." How then could you occupy the
post of secretary, if it was an elected post and you had occupied
no elected posts?
Rataiclwk: I find it difficult to explain now what happened in
1913, but I quite definitely remember that.
Vyshinsky: Did you bungle your testimony?
Rataichak: I affirm that I answered quite correctly to the
question.
Vyshinsky: Did you tell an untruth?
Rataichak: In the biography of 1922?
Vyshinsky: Yes. Did you tell an untruth?
Rataichak: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: You staied that you led three strikes. ls that true?
Rataichak: I took part in them. .
Vyshinsky: But you wrote that you led them.
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You stated that you escaped from prison camp
three times. What was the truth?
Rataichak: I made three attempts, but I escaped once.
Vyshinsky: Did you state that you escaped three times?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you tell the truth?
Hataichak: No, but I w.ant to make a reservation. I made several
attempts to correct. . . .
Vyshinsky: No, excuse me, you might have tried to escape
from prison camp 200,000 times, but you wrote that you eseaped
three times.
Rataichak: I made all these corrections in my biography not
at the preliminary investigation but in April 1936. Since April 1936
I have had a new autobiography.
Vyshinsky: That is, the old autobiography no longer satisfied
you? Very well, we shall also speak of your new autobiography;
it will be directly associated with your crime. But meanwhile we
are speaking of your old autobiography, that is, of the one that
served you from 1922 to 1936, and in which there were a number
of false statements.
Rataichak: I would say---:inaccuracies.
Vyshinsky: Why did you state in the questionnaire that you
had been an agitator, that you had escaped three times from a
military prison camp, that you had led three strikes, that you
had been secretary of a Metal Workers' Union, ,and so on? What
'ffiS your purpose? In the testimony you gave at the preliminary
ihvestigation you replied as follows: "I wanted to ascribe to my401

self revolutionary services which had never actually existed." Is
that right?
Rataichak: It is.
Vyshinsky: \\'hat do we call people who ascribe to themselves
non-existing revolutionary services?
Rataichak: They deceive. . . .
Vyshinsky: TI1ey deceive, they represent themselves as something they are not?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: l\fay one call it adventurism?
Rflfaichak: I cannot call it that.
Vyshinsky: Of cour~ not, and I do not expect you to.
Tell me, please, did the Secretary of the Central Committee
of our Party, Comrade Yezhov, summon you in February 1936 to
come and explain your autobiography?
·
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you make these corrections to him, or did you
continue to deceive him?
Rataiclwk: Yes, he summoned me.
Vyshinsky: Did you write an autobiography in his office?
Rataichak: I <lid not write it there, but after a couple of days
I wrote a new autobiography as I haiCI been told to.
Vyshinsky: And did you submit it?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsk~J: Did you draw up the biography correctly?
· Rataichak: The new one-yes. I left out everything unnecesmry.
~
Vyshinsky: Be good enough to answer iny questions. Di.d,_you
draw up an autobiography in February 1936?
·
Rataichak: I did.
Vyshinsky: Did you draw it up correctly?
Rataiclwk: I did.
Vyshinsky: Did you <leceive the Secretary of the Central Co1hmittee of the Party, Comrade Yezhov?
Rataiclwk: Yes, I did deceive him.
Vyshinsky: You deceived him in February 1936?
Rataiclwk: Undoubtedly.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat was your position in February 1936?
Rataiclw!.:: If I may explain. . . .
-Vyshinsky: No, answer.
Rataichak: It fa verv difficult to answer in this way.
Vyshinsky: You understand Russian wry well, although you
are a German and a Pole?
Rataichak: Comparatively ~ell.
402

Vyshinsky: What position did you hold in February 1936?
Rataichak: Chief of the Central Administration of the Chemical
Industry.
Vyshinsky: With such an autobiography?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: May I question Pyatakov?
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): Was Rataichak a close assistant of
vours?
- Pyatakop: Like all the Chiefs of Administrations.
Vyshinsky: I ask you, was Rataiehak you·r close assistant iu
the People's Commissariat of Heavy· Industry? ·
·
Pyatakov: He was .
.Vyshinsky: Did you know of this autobiography?
Pyatakov: I heard it here for the first time.
Vyshinsky: So you did not know who your assistant was?
Pyatakov: I <lid not.
Vyshinsky: Sit down. (To Rataichak): Did ycm tell anybody
that you were an airman in the German army?
Rataichak: No.
Vyshinsky: Or that you were ah airman at all?
Rataichak: I remember there was once Siuch talk.
Vyshinsky: I ask you, did you tell anybody or not?
Rataichak: When there was talk of politics. . . .
Vyshinsky: I am not asking you when there was a talk, I am
asking you whether you told anybody, or not.
Rataichak: I did.
Vyshinsky: Were you an airman?
Rataichak: No.
Vyshinsky: Tell me, why, not having been an airman, did you
s:l,y that you were an airman?
Rataichak: I remember that there was talk among comrades of
flights in connection with business affairs, and in the course of
the talk I several times said that I was an old airman.
Vyshinsky: Who said that?
Rataichak: I <lid.
Vyshinsky: Not only an airman, but even an old ai.rman?
Rataichak: Yes, meaning that I stood flying very well.
Vyshinsky: And what helped you?
Rataichak: Nothing.
Vyshinsky: Are you a dentist?
Rataichak: No.
Vyshinsky: Then why did you not say that you were a dentht,
but did say that you were an airman? Were you an airman?
.403

Rataichak: No.
Vyshinsky: Then why did you say so? So, in February there
was an incorrect biography?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And when did you write a correct one?
Rataiclwk: After the talk with N. I. Yezhov.
Vyshinsky: After February?
Rataichak: Ye.s.
Vysliinsky: In what month?
Rataichak: Immediately after the conversation.
Vyshinsky: That is, you first submitted an incorrect one?
Rataichak: 1·did not submit anything. The old autobiography
was in the file. Nikolai Ivanovich during the course of a very
brief conversation put several questions. I said that there were
over-statements, inaccuracies. Nikolai Ivanovich said, take the
autobiography away with you. leave out every_thing unnecessary
and submit it as it should be. That was the whole conversation.
Vyslzinsky: You took it and altered it?
Rataichak: In altering the autobiography, I deceived the Central
Committee by the fact alone that I did not mention that there
were a number of .inaccuracies :in it. That is the whole point about
the autobiography.
Vyshinsky: So, you had one autobiography, in February another, and in May you corrected it and there was a third?
Rataichak: I did not correct it.
Vyshinsky: That is, you did not deceive the Secr~tary of the
Central Committee?
"': ·
Rafaichak: Yes, I did deceive him, because in reply to 1-.ikolui
Ivanovich's question . . . .
Vyshinsky: You gave an incorrect answer?
Rataichak: Yes.
·
V~h~dy:~dth~?

1

Rataichak: In the questionnaire I stated what was absolutely
correct.
Vyshinsky: That again is only on the basis of what you say.
You began to alter it when you began to be detected?
Rataichak: I have already described the conversation.
Vyshinsky: You began to correct it after you had_been S\l.IDmoned to the Central Committee?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is, after that autobiography had aroused suspicion?
Rataiclwk: Yes.
404.

Vyshinsky: That means that the new autobiography may also
have to be altered?
Ralaichak: I do not know.
Vyshinsky: And now?
Rataichak: Now I am telling everything that is true and that
I know. To what extent the corrections I made were important can
be judged from the fact that after I handed the questionnaire to
!\ikolai Ivanovich Yezhov we had no other conversations.
Vyshinsky: Did you know Krapivsky?
· Rataichak: I did. He was.employed in the Volhynia Provincial
Council of National Economy, where I was assistant chairman.
Vyshinsky~ What was Krapivsky's job?
Rataichak: He was chief of the supply department.
VJJshinsky: And was occupied with his own work?
Rataichak: And was occupied with his own work.
Vyshinsky: "\Vas he occupied with anything else apart from
this?
Ratai.chak: No.
Vyshinsky: Pardon me, apart from this, did he occupy himself with anything else unofficially?
· Rataichak: In my opinion, he did.
Vyshinsky: In your opinion and in my opinion.
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What did he occupy himself with unofficially?
Rataichak: Profiteering in government property.
Vyshinsky: And what else?
Rataichak: Profiteering, strictly speaking, was all.
Vyshinsky: I cannot hear a word you are saying, speak louder.
Rataiclwk: I am speaking loudly. ).
Vy_shinsky: Not at all loudly) you could speak loudly on certain
o<;casions.
· Rataichak: He was engaged in profiteering, and that was all
that might have been expected.
Vyshinsky~· He was employed as stores manager in an institution of which you \Vere assistant chairman, and he engag~d in
profiteering. What did he profiteer in?
Rataichak: I do not quite know, but he profiteered in government property.
·
Vyshinsky: In order to profiteer in government property, one
must have govern_ment property. That is to say, he had government property?
Rataichak: He was employed as chief of supply.. ·..
Vyshinsky: Take your time, or else we shall again be at odds.
Speak calmly, and tell us exactly how it was.
405

Ralaichak: It is not easy to speak calmlv about everything.
Vyshinsky: That's true. I understand your position, it is difficult to speak. To put it briefly, he stole government property?
Rataichak: Yes, that is so.
· Vyshinsky: That is true?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You knew about it?
Rataichak: Partly, yes.
Vyshinsky: Only partly?
Rataichak: Yes, I cannot say that I knew everything, I- did
not know the extent.
· Vyshinsky: I am not asking you that. Did you know that he
was stealing government property?
Rataichak: I had a feeling that he was, unquestionably.
Vyshinsky: No, you knew about it.
Rataichak: No, but I had a distinct feeling that this was the case.
Vyshinsky: I will produce your testimony at the preliminary
investigation. Did you know about it, or did you not?
Rataichak: I did.
Vyshinsky: That is, you did not "feel," but you knew. There is
a difference, is that not so?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Why did you, the assistant chairman of the Provincial Council· of National Econoony,· keep in your employment a
swindler who was stealing government property?
·
Rataichak: (Remains silent.}
Vyshinsky: Why do you emP'loy an old swindler,ID an institution under your charge? Did you not know that he was a ~w.indler
and profiteer? \Vhy not? You, the Chief of the Central Administra·
tion of the Chemical Industry. \Vhy not?
Rataichak: {Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: \Vere you in any way connected with him matef
rially?
Rataichak (in a barely audible voice): I was. I lived in his
house.
Vyshinsky: You did not live in his house, but lived at his expense?
Rataichak: It can be put that way.
Vyshinsky: That is, you confirm that you shielded-the criminal
offences of Krapivsky while you were assistant chairman of the
Council of National Economy because he shared the stolen money
with you. Is that right?
Rataichak: Perhaps it is not quite exact, but on the whole, that
is the sense of it.
406

Vyshinsky: ~ow tell us about your Trotskyite activities.
Rataichak: Shall I relate them?
The President: Comrade Vyshinsky, shall he relate them, or do
you prefer to question him?
Vyshinsky: Let him relate them.
Rataichak: ~Iy active Trotskyite work began in 1934.
Vyshinsky: When did you join the Party?
Rataiclwk: In 1918. I was officially registered on January 6,
1919.
\'yshinsky: Who recommended you?
Rataichak: I was recommended by Gavrilyuk, Rubtsova, Novikov and also. . . .
·
Vyshinsky: Did they know your biography?
Rataichak: \Ve lived together.
Vyshinsky: Did they know your biography?
Rataichak: They did, because we fought together in the same
detachment and lived together.
Vyshinsky: Did they know what sort of a person you were?
At that time you had your old autobiography. Did they know your
old autobiography?
·
Rataichak: They knew what r had written in the questionnaire.
Vyshinsky: And not what conformed with reality?
Rataichak: No.
l'yshinsky: That is, you deceived them too?
Rataiclwk: They recommended me. . . .
Vyshinsky: Pardon me, pardon me. Did you deceive them?
Rataichak: So it would appear. They recommended me because
of my active work under the Soviet power.
Vyshinsky: They saw your biography, they saw your "revolutionary services," and .so recommended you? It appears that you
·deceived them as you did everybody who read your biography?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen did you become connected with the TrotskyitcS. when did you become one of the Trotskyite cadres?
Rataichak: In 1934.
Vyshinsky: \Vho brought you into the Trotskyite organization?
Rataichak: All the preparations took place . . . .
Vyshinsky: Who brought you into the Trotskyite organization?
Rataichak: Pyatakov. My first conversation with Pyatakov took
place at the beginning of 1934, while active work began with wrecking activities connected with the construction plan for 1934.
Vyshinsky: Perhaps we had better proceed by questioning. Did
you join the Trotskyite organization?
407

Rataiclwk: I did.
Vyshinsky: Did you receive instructions regarding wrecking
work?
Rataichak: I did.
Vyshinsky: Did you receive instructions regarding_ diversive
acts?
Rataichak: I did.
Vyshinsky: Were you- connected with espionage?
Rataichak: I was.
Vyshinsky: Through whom?
Rataichak: Through Pushin and Hrasche.
Vyshinsky (to Pushin): Accused Pushin, is it correct that Rataichak was connected through you with espionage organization?
Pushin: Through me, and also directly.
Vyshinsky: There, he did not say the last point.· (Turning to
Hrasche) : Accused Hrasche, was he connected through you with
agents of the German intelligence service?
Hrasche: Yes, he was connected with agents of the German intelligence service.
Vyshinsky: And were you connected with them?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: As
agent?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What did that consist in?
.
Hrasclze: In transmitting materials, secret information regarding the work of the chemical industry.
Vyshinsky: Was this known to Rataichak?
Hrasche.-:Yes, he Was my Chief~
:-Vyshinsky (to Rataichak) : Consequently, you transmitte{f"fo
the German intelligence service espionage material which you pos_
.
sessed by virtue of your office?
Rataichak: Yes, I was the Chief of the Central Administration
of the Basic Chemical Industry.
#
Vyshinsky: \Vere there wreckfog activities?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vere there diversive acts?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Was there espionage?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you take part in terrorist organizations?
·
. Rataichak: No.
Vyshinsky: Did you know about the terrorist organization?
Rataichak: I knew about Trotsky's line from Pyatakov.
Vushimky: Did Pyatakov tell you that he was a member of the.

an

408

terrorist organization, did he inform you of Trotsky's directives,
including the directive about terrorism?
Ra_taiclwk: He did.
l-'yshinsky: Terrorism against whom?
Rataichak: Against the leaders of the Party and the government.
Vyshinsky: That is, you knew that your .organization was
making preparations to commit terrorist acts against the leaders of the Party and the leaders of the government? Did you
know it?
Rataichak: I did .
. Vyshinsky: And what was your attitude towards terrorism?
· Rataichak: I stated that at the preliminary investigation.
Vyshinsky: I am not asking you about what you said at the preliminary investigation. Answer the question. What was your attitude towards terrorism?
Rataichak: I did not agree with it.
"Vyshinsky: Why did you not agree with it?
Rataichak: (Remains silent.)
V.yshinsky: \Vhat did not please you? Wrecking pleased you,
diversive a~ts pleased you, espionage pleased you? \Vhy did terrorism not please you, why did you not agree with it?
· Rataichak: All the things you have enumerated are vile .
. .·. _ Vgshipsky: All are vi:le. But at any rat~ you did not dissociate
yourself from the group which was engaged in terrorism,_ you did
inot leave it?
· Rataichak: No.
~·.
l'yshinsky: Did you ever attempt to inform anybody of these
:abominable things?
' Rataichak: No.
. Vyshinsky: Did you never attempt to disclose all this treacher:ous. devilish work?
.
. Rataichak: If I had disclosed it, I would not be sitting here in
!the dock. I endeavoured to get away from this work.
' Vyshinsky: You did endeavour to get away?
t Rataiclzak: At the end of 1935 and in 1936 I no longer carried
!On any practical activities . ·
.
~.,; Vyshinsky: \Vhat did your diversive work consist in?
~/;. Rataichak: In accordance with my instructions, transmitted
~rough Pushin, three breakdowns were arranged, one diversive
13-ct at the Gorlovka Works and two other breakdowns-one at the
!Ne,·sky Works and the other at the Voskressen:sk Combined Chemical Works.
j"" Vyshinsky: Let us take the Gorlovka Works. What was this
!breakdown?
~--

~·

·~

Rataichak: Owing to this breakdown certain of the installations were put out of action.
.
.
Vyshinsky: \Vas there a breakd10wn at the Go'flovka \Vorks?
Rataichak: There was.
Vyshinsky: Namely?
.Rataichak: An explosion. The department and the works as a
whole were put out of action for several days. Three workers lost
their lives.
Vyshinsky: Do you know their names?
Rataiclwk: I have forgotten them.
Vyshinsky: Did you ever inquire?
Rataichak: I knew them very well from: the findings, but I
have now forgotten them.
Vyshinsky: I will remind you: Kurkin, Leonid Feodorovich,
20 years old, Young Communist League member, shock wo!ker,
Stakhanovite; Mostetz, Nikolai Ivanovich, fitter; Strelnikova, Irina
Yegorovna, 22 years old, filter-tender. \Vho murdered them?
Rataichak: We did.
Vyshinsky: You-the Chief of the Central Administration of
lhc Chemical Industry?
Rataichak: (Remains silent.}
Vyshinsky: When was the second case?
Rataichak: '!'he second case did not involve loss of life. It was
the collapse of a reserve gas line. The plant worked very unevenly
for several days.
Vyshinsky: What was the third case?
Rataichak: The third case was in November 1934; it'was an explosion in one of the departments of the air chambers, as a :-result
of which one of the chambers was put out of action.·
·
Vyshinsky: This was on the Linde installations?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you organize it?
f
Rataichak: It was otganized on my instructions.
Vyshinsky: Was anybody killed?
Rataichak: Two workers, I think.
Vyshinsky: You do not remember? I will remind you: Luncv,
Ivan Yegorovich, shock worker, one of the best apparatus-tenders
in the department; Yudin, Vladimir Andreyevich, 26 years old,
student in his Jast year at the Tomsk Polytechnical fustifote, then
on industrial practice. Do you remember?
Rataichak: That is so.
Vyshinsky: \Vas the diversive act at the Voskressensk Combined Chemical \Vorks performed on your instructions?
Rataichak: Yes.
410

Vyshinsky: Was there any loss of life?
Rataichak: No.
Vyshinsky: What about the 17 workers killed and 15 injured?
Rataichak: That was on another occasion, Citizen Procurator.
Vyshinsky: \Vell, let us see. When did the fire take place?
Rataichak: In 1936.
Vyshinsky: Was it on the night of August 1?
Rataichak: Yes.
· Vyshinsky: Did you arrange the fire?
Rataichak: No.
Vyshinsky: Who arranged it?
Rataichak: I do not know.
Vyshinsky: You do not know?
.
Rataichak: No. I was referring to the diversive act which took
place in April-May, 1934, when one of the acid departments ~as
put out of action in accordance with my instructions.
.
Vyshinsky: That is, there were two diversive acts: one on your
instructions to put one of the departments out of order; and the
other the fire on the night of August 1, 1936?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And when was on.e of the departments put out of
action_?
Rataichak: In 1934, in April-May.
Vyshinsky: And did you say anything about the fire in August
1936?.
Rataichak: I did not testify about that because I had nothing to
do with it.
Vyshinsky: Did you speak about it without reference to yourself?
Rataichak: I had nothing to do with that fire.
Vyshinsky: And is it a fact that immediately after the fire you
gave orders to proceed to the clearance work, although it involved
danger to the lives of the workers?
Rataichak: l demanded the immediate liquidation of the consequences.
Vyshinsky: Pardon me, not liquidation. Did you demand that
clearance work should be immediately proceeded with, although it
involved extreme danger to human life?
Rataichak: Yes, I did.
Vyshinsky: Do you know that on your demand the workers
undertook the clearance work?
Rataichak: I do.
/'
Vyshinsky: Do you know that the wall caved in?
411

Rataiclwk: I was on the spot an<l directed the work from the
start;
Vyshinsky: Don't hurry, don't run ahead. Answer the question:
do you know that the wall caved in and the tower collapsed?
Rataiclwk: I do, I was on the spot myself.
Vyshinsky: And that 17 workers were killed?
Rataichak: That is so.
Vyshinsky: And that 15 were injured?
Rataichak: That is so.
Vyshinsky: Is that a fact?
Rataichak: Yes, it is.·
Vyshinsky: And you say that you had nothing to do with it?
Rataichak: No, but I had to do that, Citizen Procurator, because
if we had not taken this measure of precaution there was a danger
that the lives of hundreds of workers might have been lost. That is
why_ I myself directed the clearance work on the spot.
Vyshinsky: You <lirected it in such a way that 17 workers were
killed and 15 were wounded. Is that so?
Rataichak: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: You directed the clearance operations in such a
way that 17 workers were killed and 15 injured.
Rataiclwk: That is true, but it was the only thing to do.
Vyshinsky: And was it the only thing to do when you blew up
departments and installations and committed other diversive acts?
Rataichak: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: Who commissioned you to engage in espionage
w~?

~

Rataichak: Pyatakov.
- -....
Vyshinsky: May I put a question to Pyafakov?
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky (to Pyatakov): Do you confirm this?
Pyatakov: No.
1
Vyshinsky (to Rataichak): Tell us, when did Pyatakov instruct
you to engage in espionage?
Rataichak: Prior to my conversation with Pyatakov on this
question, I have already stated this during the preliminary investigation, and also in my testimony in connection with Loginov, I
had a conversation with Loginov. This- was approximately at the
end of 1934; I hesitate to say whether it was August or-Septemoer.
During this conversation Loginov told me that he had just spoken
to Pyatakov and that Pyatakov had instructed him to establish
contacts with an intelligence service. During this conversation, as I
have already testified, I asked Loginov how this could be done,
and what abcmt people. The name of Hrasehe was then mentioned
412

as having connections with foreign representatives, with foreigners;
and he then spoke about Pushin also. vVith respect to Hrasche,
Loginov spoke affirmatively, and with respect to Pushin he spoke
presumptively that Pushin might have connections . . .
After this I had a talk with Pyatakov, in the course of which he
confirmed the directives.
Vyshinsky: Personally?
Rataichak: Yes, he confirmed Trotsky's directives transmitted
to me by Loginov. And accepted. them and began to carry them
out.
Vyshiflsky (to Pyatakov): Do you now recall the conversation
with Rataichak about espionage?
·
Pyatakou: No, I deny it.
Vyshinsky: And with Loginov?
Pyatakou: I also deny it.
Vyshinsky: And that members of your organization were connected with foreign intelligence services?
Pyatakou: As to the fact that there were such connections, I do
not deny; but that I knew about the establishment . . .
Vyshinsky: Did you give instructions to establish conn~ctions
with fascist forces?
Pyatakov: Yes, I communicated the instructions w~ had receive4 regarding the establishment of connections with fascist
forces.
Vyshinsky: And is the foreign intelligence service a fascist
force?
Pyatakov: That is logic. I have said that I knew nothing about
this.
Vyshinsky: It must be assumed that the intelligence service is
part of the fascist forces.
Pyatakou: That must be assumed.
Vyshinsky: I have no further questions to put to Rataichak.
The President: Has the Counsel for Defence any questions?
Kommodou: I have.
The President: If you have many questions, perhaps you will
leave it until after the recess?
Kommodou: As you like.
Vyshinsky: Since the Court investigation is drawing to an end,
and will probably be finished this evening or tomorrow morning,
I would request that the questions to Monosovich, the expert
witness, be confirmed, so as to give him a few hours to prepare his
answers to the questions.
The President: Very well.
4·1\3

Vyshinsky: I have submitted to the expert witness Monosovich
a number of questions in \Vritten form (reads) : _
"l. In Connection with the Explosion which Occurred on
November U, 1935, i11 the Hydrogen Department of the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works
'"a. What were the immediate causes of the explosion of .the nitrogen apparatus in the chambers of the
hydrogen department of the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works on November 11, 1935?
"b. Could this explosion have been averted?
"c. \Vas the explosion due-to accident or to malicious
intent?
"d. Do the explanations given at the_ preliminary
investigation by the witness Tamm as to the circum·
stances and causes of the explosion correspond to the
actual technical information in the possesion of the experts?
"2. Jn Connection with the Explosion which Occurred on
April 7, 1934, at the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works
"a. \Vhat were the immediate causes of the explosion?
"b_~ Does the testimony given at the preliminary
investigation by the witness Tamm and the accused
Pushin as to the circumstances and causes of this ex-'
plosion correspond with the technical information in
the possession· of the experts?
"""'
"c. \Vas the explosion due to accident or-ta malicious intent?
"3. In Connection with the Collapse of the Gas Line at
the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works on November 14,
19:J4
f
'"a. What were the causes of the collapse of the gas
line at the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works?
"b. Does the testimony given at the preliminary
investigation by the witness Tamm and the accused
Pushin as to the circumstances and causes of the collapse correspond to the actual technicaUnform:}tion in
the possession of the experts?
· -"c. Was the collapse due to accident or to malicious
intent?"
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any additions to.
make?
414

Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.}
The Pre.~ident: I presume that the final replies of the expert
witnesses -can lbe given after the testimony of Pushin and.Tamm.
(To expert witness): You are requested to submit your conclusions in written form by the end of the evening session. ·
The Court is adjourned until 6 p.m.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of tlie U.S.S.R.

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

415

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 27, 1937, 6.00 P.M.

I'

Commandant: The Court is coming. Please rise.
The President: The session is resumed. Ha-s Counsel for Defence Komrnodbv any questions?
Kommodov (to Rataichak): Please tell us exactly when you
entered the Trotskyite organization?
Rataichak: Early in 1934.
Kommodov: Whom did you personally draw into this organization?
Rataichak: The first person whom I drew into the work of the
Trotskyite organization was Pushin, then Karnissky.
Kommodov: Under what circumstances, where and when did
you draw Pushin into it?
Rataichak: ln regard to each one of t'hem there was a specia!
approach, quite special conditions. l can deal in detail with Pushin, who is seated here in the dO{'.k.
Kommodov: IriS he I want to know about.
The President: Tell us about Pushin.
Rataichak: I have known Pushin since 1927, from my former
work in one of the industrial syndicates, the Coke Syndicate.
Pushin's state of mind and his conduct became perfectly clear _to
me as far back as 1929. This was revealed during one of the Party
purges, when Pu.shin \Vas expelled from the Party. Subsequently,
since he was a man with no small knowledge in the fa~ld of industry, an engineer, I was one of those who petitioned the commission for Pushin's reinstatement in the Party. Pushin .was
reinstated after a certain time.
After that I met Pusihin quite frequently, both in connection
with his work at the plant and with the work in the head office. I had occasion to talk with him frequently. More0>ver, from
my talks with Pushin I discovered that Push.in, to put it mildly,
had extremely little in common with the,Party. And in 1933 when
I began workinig with Pushin in the head office, I was sure
that Pushin was a concealed Trotskyite; and, aocordingly, in 193-1,
after a conversation with Pyatakov, I talked quite definitely with
Pu&hin regarding his pOllitical views, his frame of mind. Nor did
Pushin deny that his frame of mind was not like that of a Party
416

member, and he gave his consent to participate in the TrotskyHe
orga-nization, since he fully shared the views of the Trotskyites.
Kommodov: Under your guidance Pushin climbed the rungs of
the official ladder from 1928 onwards?
Rataiclwk: Pushin did so partly under my immediate guidance
and -partly in organizations under my charge.
Kommodov: Pushin's transfer from the provinces to Moscow
took place with your permission?
Rataichak: With my knowledge .
. Kommodov: What services did you render Pushin when
Pushin wa'S prosecuted for negligence-do you remember such a
case?
Rataichak: I remember that in 1928 Pushin wa" to be proseeuted for crime of office. On that occasion I personally
.studied this case, went to the place where Pushin was to he
prosecuted, and pleaded that criminal proceedings should not be
instituted against Pushin, for I considered that his offence was
not a criminal nor a malicious one, that there was every reason for
not instituting criminal proceedings against him. For this very
reason the judicial organs of investigation agreed with me that
Pushin should be brought before a court of his comrades and that
there was no need for criminal proceedings.
Kommodov: Tell the Court: in 1934, while you were drawing
Pushin into the Trotskyite organization, did you point out to
Pushin that he was in a certain mea:sure indebted to you, both as
concerned his career and personal inatters, seeing that he had
been in such an unpleasant position?
Rataichak: I do not remember any such conversation, because
it could not have had any influence on the course of Pushin's en-listment, since I knew his sentiments very well.
Kommodov: I am only intere'Sted to know whether such con''ersations took place or not.
Rataichak: I repeat that I do not remember any such conver·
sations.
Kommodov: You do not remember?
· Rataichak: No.
Kornmodov: Did you point out to Pu.shin, when you were
drawing him into the organization, what would be the field of his
.activities in the organization? Ratdichak: I to:ld Pusihin quite specifically about the tasks
with which we, with which I was confronted, and about the task
that would confront him, as a member of this organization.
Kommodov: But what field of wrecking or diversive activ.ity did you -plan for Pusbin?
Rataichak: Pushin was assigned a field with which he was
417

very well acquainted, ~ing an expert in this maHer-namely the
Gorlovka ·works, Qf -..vhich hf; was the chief engineer, chief of construction and that is \vhy he was assigned this position.
Kommodov: Now those acts were committed at the Gorlovka
\Vorks, and you were kept posted on those acts, you personally?
Rataichak: I was informed after the commission of each act,
because I received the official findings of the case and knew that
these acts were the result of Pushin's work.
Kommodov: And before committing a diversive act, did
Pushin receive instructions from you and, so to &peak, your sanction for the commission of that act?
Rata'ichak: I did not give Pushin instructions in each particular case to commit a specific act. I have pointed out that early
in 1934 after the commission of these acts Pushin twice informed
me that the act had been committed by him and his associates.
Kommodov: Was it you who selected and appointed the members of the commission which went to Gorlovka to investigate the
last diversive act?
Rataichak: No.
.·
Kommodov: And who did?
Rataichak: My assistant.
Kommodov: \Vith your knowledge?
Rataichak: I would hesitate to assert that, because I was ill at
the time and because it was not 1}.ntil after the commission of that
act that I came back to work.
Kommodov: Do you recall who were the members of the commissionf .
Rataichak: I remember. that the- commission included Yushkevich, Golovanov, Pushin.
Kommodo1': Wa;s Y1rnhkevich in the organization?
Rataichak: Yes.
Kommodov: Was Golovanov a member of the organization?
Rataichak: Likewise.
Kommodov: Was Pushin a member of the organization?
Rataichak: Yes.
Kommodov: \Vas this commission formed with your kno~ledge?
·
Rataichak: I again repeat that I could not appoint a commission, since I was ill at that time.
Kommodov: Who was your assistant?
Rataichak: Yushkevich.
Kommodov: So Yushkcvich selected the members of this commission?
_Rc:taichak: At all ~v~nts Yushkevich had the main say in thej
selection -of the comnuss10n.
·
+18

Kommodov: And did you know of whom the commission was

composed?

Rataichak: I again repeat that after receiving the findings I
learned about the composition of the commission but I could not
have had any influence in the matter of selection, since at that time I
was ill, I did not go to the office.
Kommodov: Did you know that Golovanov had been convicted before?
Rataichak: I did.
Kommodov: Did you give him a reeommendhtion for work in
~foseow?

Rataichak: He came to Moscow with my knowledge.
Kommodov: The handing over of information to Lenz went on
with your sanction, with your consent?
Rataichak: \V.ith my consent.
Kommodov: Did Pushin tell you what information Lenz de-

manded?

Rataichak: On the first occasion.
Kommodov: And you permitted this?
Rataichak: Yes.
Kommodov: Were ymI yourself directly-connected with Lenz?
Rataichak: No.
Kommodov: Only through the miedium of Pushin?
Rataichak: Yes.
Kommodov: What instructions did you give Pu.shin as regards
wrecldng work?
Rataichak: Nothfog concretely; ollily geneffil guiding principles.
Kommod.ov: Tell the Court, when was the last diversive ad
at Gorlovka?
Rataichak: At the end of 1935.
Kommodov: In 1936 what was done concretely under an _the
three counts on whkh Pusihin is being charged-?
Rataichak: Nothing.
Kommodov: You confirm this?
Rataichak: Yes, because I sent Pushin to a construction job in
the Caucasus.
Kommodov: \Vb.en was he sent to the Caucasus?
Rataichak: At the end of '1935.
Kommodov: 'While there, in the Caucasus, did he maintain
only business connections, or counter-revolutionary ones too·?
·
Rataichak: Not directly with me.
·
Kommodov: Under whom did he work?
Rataichak·: He worked there 'llllder Golovanov.
Kommodov: I have no more questions to put to the accused.
419

Vyslzinsky: I have a question to put to Rata:ichak. \Vho was
directly connected. with you in the matter of wrec!dng and_ diversive activities?
Rataiclwk: Kozinitsky, Yushkevich, Golo~anov, Todorsky.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat post did Kozinitsky hold? Rataichak: He was chief engineer superintending construction
work.
Vyshinsky: And Todorsky? Where did he work?
Rataichak: As one of my assistants.
Vyshinsky: In the AU-Union Committee of the Cheffiical Indn-stry, or in the Central Administration?
Rataichak: In the Central Administration.
Vyshinsky: Did you know Lenz?
Rataichak: I knew Lenz as an :installation mechanic of one of
the foreign firms, as a member of a wrecking organization connected with the German intelligence service.
Vyshinsky: Whom else did you know?
Rataichak: I knew also-Meyerowitz.
Vyshinsky: Was he also an· agent of the German inteJI.igence
service?
Rataichak: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did he visit the U.S.S.R.?
Rataichak: Fairly often.
Vyshinsky: Did you meet him?
Rataichak: Yes. Once he came to see me on offidal business, and
afterwards I taJked to him as to a member of the wrecking organization.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions to put to Rataichak. If
the Counsel for Defence have no questions, I have a request to
make.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
Vgshinsky: I want to produce a number of photographs of
various people before Rataichak for him to identify Meyerowitz.
The photos are without any inscriptions or marks whatever. \Vill
he identify him here or not? Permit me to hand these photographs
to Rataichak.
The President: Aecused Rataichak, ten photographs will be
handed to you. Look at them and say whether the citizen whom
you call Meyeroy.'itz is among them.
(The commandant presents the photographs to Rataichak for
his inspection.)
Rataichak: 'I1his is Meyerowitz.
Vyshinsky: Do you recognize him?
Rataichak: Yes.

420

The President: I certify that the photograph in U1e likeness
of which the accused Rataichak recognized the citizen Meyerowitz
is completely identical with that attached to the residence
permit for a foreigner issued in November 1932 to the German
subject, Paul Meyerowitz. The said residence permit for a foreigner is in the entry permit file of the Foreign Section of the
Administrative Department of the Moscow Regional Executive
Committee.
We will now proceed to the examination of the accused
Hrasche. Is your name Hrasche or Hrasche?
Hrasche: Hrasche.
The President: Do you confirm the testimony which you gave
at the preliminary investigation and when being examined by the
Procurator of the Union?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: When did you first come to Russia?
Hrasche: In 1909.
Vysh'insky: From where?
Hrasche: Bohemia.
Vyshinsky: To what town?
Hrasche: To the town of Yeisk, in the Kuban region.
Vyshinsky: You were a subject of what country at that time?
Hrasche: A subject of Austria-Hungary.
Vyshinsky: That was in 1909?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What was your occupation?
Hrasche: I came as a teacher of French, afterwards of Gern1an.
I gave lessons in Yeisk in a secondary school, and also private
lessons. I srtayed in Yeisk up to the end of 1917. In May 1917 I
joined the Bolshevik Party there.
Vyshinsky: In May 1917?
Hrasche: Yes, approximately.
Vyshinsky: You were a subject of what country at that time?
Hrasche: At that time I was a civilian prisoner of war.
Vyshinskg: But how did you become a prisoner of war? You
arrived and gave Frenoh and German lessons, and suddenly in
1917 you became a prisoner of war?
Hrasche: I was a civilian prisoner of war from 1914 onwards.
Vyshinskg: A civilian prisoner of war? That.is to say, in other
words, you were interned in connection with the imperialist war?
Hrasche: Yes, quite right.
Vyshinskg: Where were you interned?
Hrasche: I arrived in Kiev and was arrested there. ·Then,
because I was a Czrch, I was released and ordered to l~ave for the
Kuban region.
421

Vyshinsl.:y: And you went there?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Why to the -Kuban region?
Hrasche: Because I declared th.aJt I had worked and was working there.
Vyshinsky: So in 1917 you were still a subject of Au&tria-Hungary?
Hrasche: A subject of Austria-Hungary and a civilian prisoner
of war. Early in November 1917 I took on Russian citizenship in
the town of Yeisk.
·
Vyshinsky: In what way did you take this citizenship? What
government existed there at that time?
Hrasche: There was the same government at that time as
under Kerensky.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, the Kerensky government.
Hrasche: Yes, the Provisional Government. The act itself was
performed in the town militia station in the presence of the Chief
of Militia and a representative of the town council.
Vyshinsky: So from that moment on you have been a Russian
suibject, a Russian citizen? Do I understand you correctly?
Hrasche: The question is rather hard to answer.
Vyshinsky: Why? ···
·
Hrasche: Because right then I was told that the case would
afterwards be sent on to the gubernia centre in Yekaterinodar.
from where I was to receive a passport. For the time being I was
given a temporary certificate.
Vyshinsky: Of what state did ymi consider yourself a citizen
at that time?
Hrasche: I considered myself a Russia'n citizen.
Vyshinsky: Of the Russian state?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That was in 1917?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And in 1918?
Hrasche: In November I left for Kiev. . . .
Vyshinsky: I am not asking where you went. Of what state did
you consider yoursielf a subject in 1918?
Hrasche: Also Russian.
Vyshinsky: And in 1919?
Hrasche: In 1919 I considered myself a Czechoslovak~an.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, being a subject of Austria-Hungary
and having acquired Russian citizenship, you declared yourself to
be a Czechoslovakian? Correct?
Hrasche: Yes. In 1919 I left for Czechoslovakia.
Vyshinsky: And returned?
422

H rasche: I returned from there in the .guise of a former Russian
prisoner of war.
Vyshinsky: What does that mean?
Hrasche: I returned to Russia from Czechoslovakia with a
group of former Russian prisoners of war.
Vyi;l1insky: That is to say, as if you had l;>een a prisoner in
Czechoslovakia and were returning?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In what year was that?
- Hrasche: At the end of 1920 or the beginning of 1921.
Vyshinsky: Where did you live in 1921?
Hrasche: In Moscow.
Vyshinsky: Did you live in Moscow in 1922 also? ·
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did you live in Moscow in 1923 also?
H rasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: On what passport?
Hrasche: In 1922 I was given a labour registration book.
Vyshinsky: As a citizen of what country?
Hrasche: As a Soviet citizen.
Vyshinsky: And what was your real cHizenship? You came
here in 1909 as a sUbject of Austria-Hungary. Was that your real
nationality?
Hrasche: Austria-Hungary has not existed since 1918.
Vyshinsky: .But it did then. And then in 1917 you became a
Russian citizen?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In 1919 you became a Czechoslovakian citizen?
Hrasche: Quite right.
Vyshinskg: Then you returned in the guise of a prisoner of war
and became a Russian citizen?
Hrasche: Soviet.
Vyshinsky: And received a passport?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So you consider yourself a Soviet citizen?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Then why do you keep with you a document that
you are a citizen of the Czechoslovakian Republic? Two documents. Do you know this document? (Showing a document.)
Hrasche: Yes, I know it well.
Vyshin-sky: Here are all the visas both in French and in Czech.
Here it is certified in the name of the Czechoslovakian Repul>lic
that Hrasche, Jan Yosifovich, teacher, of middle height, of suchand-such an age, cleanshaven, is a citizen of the Czechoslovakian
Republic, 1919. Why did you have with you this document that
423

you are a citizen of the Czechoslovakian Republic if you are a
Soviet citizen? A second document.
And the third document. In 1919 you had a certificate saying
that you were a citizen of Austria-Hungary. That is to say, in 1919
you simultaneously had two documents-one from the Czechoslovakian Republic, the other from Austria-Hungary, which, as you
say, did not exist. Wihy?
Hrasche: In Kiev, when I deci<led to leave for Czechoslovakia in
the summer before Kiev was occupied by Denikin's troops, the affairs of the former prisoners of war there were in charge of the
Austro-Hungarian Soviet of War Prisoners.
Vgshinsky: You received this in the Soviet?
Hrasche: In the SoYiet I received not only this certificate but
also a paper with which I intended to leave for Czechoslovakia
while the Soviets were still in power.
Vgshinsky: No, this is another paper, from the mobilization
commission, saying that you had been found unfit for military
service. Herie you are described as an Austro-Hungarian subject;
1919, valid up to August 17, 1919. Was this certificate given you
in Kiev under the ·whites or under the Soviet government?
Hrasche: Under the Soviet government.
Vyshinsky: So in 1919 you have a document saying that you
are a Czechoslovakian citizen; then you receive a d'Ocument saying
that you are an Austro-Hungarian citizen; and after that you consider yourself a Soviet citizen? Correct?
Hrasche: Not altogether.
Vyshinsky: What is wrong? Did you harve a document saying
you werie a Czechoslovakian citizen?
·
Hrasclze: Yes.
_
Vyshinsky: Did you have a document dated 1919 saying that
you were an Austro-Hungarian citizen?
Hrasche: Yes, I did.
Vyshinsky: Then, in 1922, you receive a passport as a Soviet
citizen. On v>hat grounds was this passport issued to you?
Hrasche: I was given this passport on the ground of the paper
I received in the Commission for the repatriation of prisoners of
war.
Vyshinsky: And the paper was issued to you on the basis of
the fact that you were a prisoner of war?
Hrasclze: A paper was given me by some Russian prisoners
of war whom I knew, on the basis of my false statement that I
was being persecuted.
Vyshinsl.:y: When you arrived from Czechoslovakia, you passed
yourself off as a Russian on the basis of the paper which you received thanks to the certification of certain Russian persons?
424

/-lrasche: Ye~.
Vyshinsky: Why is it written in your laLour registration book.
that your place of birth was the Kuban region?
Hrasche: In the certificate which I received in Czechoslovakia
as a former Russian prisoner of war. . . .
Vyshinsky: But you never were .a Russian prisoner of war, and
now you talk as if you ,were really convinced that you had been a
Russian prisoner of war.
Hrasche: I came in the guise of a Russian prisoner of war.
Vyshinsky: Is it true that you were born in the Kuban region?·
Hrasche: No.
Vysliinsky: In the paper it says the Kuban region-is that correct or not?
Hrasche: Incorrect.
Vyshinsky: A forged document?
Hrasche: Forged.
Vyshinsky: And what is the year of your birth?
Hrasche: 1886.
Vyshinsky: And why does it say 1880 in the passport?
Hrasche: In 1920 I was given a paper in Czechoslovakia.
Vyshinsky: In 1920?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So in this paper the year of birth is incorrectly given.
as 1880? Tell me, in what year were yon born?
Hrasche: In 1886.
Vyshinsky: Why is it given as 1880 in the passport? From your·
words?
Hrasche: That was taken from the document which I produced.
Vyshinsky: And that document was based on your words?
Hrasche: That document I received in Bahemia.
Vyshinsky: How did they know that you were born in 1880?
Why did they write that?
Hrasche: That year was given in the paper which I had as a
Russian prisoner of war.
Vyshinsky: You were issued a passport not on the strength of
the Czechoslovakian document but on the strength of that paper?"
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: What was written there was incorrect, a forgery?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Place of birth wrong. Year wrong. "What is your
first name?
Hrasche: In Czech, Jan.
l'yshinsky: And in Russian?
Hrasche: And in Russian Ivan.
Vyshinsky: So here you thought it necessary to write in Russian•
425

-not Hrasche. Jan, but Hrasche, Ivan? And cannot Jan be
-written in Russian?
Hrasche: I was persuaded that Jan and Ivan were just the
same.
Vyshinsky: The same as being born in the Kuban region or in
·the Czechoslovakian R~public?
Hrasche: No, that is different.
Vyshinsky: Your basic profession?
Hrasche: I was a teacher for seven or eight years.
Vyshinsky: Is that your basic p'rofession?
Hrasche: No, later I dropped this profession; I was a journalist,
then an economist.
Vyshinsky: ·which profession do you consider your basic one:
·teacher, journalist or economist, or politician?
Hrasche: I have been an economist for over ten years.
Vyshinsky: And why does your passport say journalist?
Hrasche: That was in 1922 or 1921.
Vyshinsky: In 1922 or 1921 you were merely a prisoner of war.
Hrasche: No, I was already working here.
Vyshinsky: 'What was your profession at the time when you
were taken prisoner?
Hrasche: Teacher.
Vyshinsky: And you were ta.ken prisoner?
Hrasche: A civilian. . . .
Vyshinsky: No, not a civilian, but a Russian prisoner of war
1n Czechoslovakia.
Hrasche: No, l was not actually a Russian prisoner of war.
Vyshinsky: So you were not taken prisoner by the Czechs?
Hrasche: No.
Vyshinsky: And I am asking you what was your profession
when you were "taken prisoner by the Czechs"?
Hrasche: In the Czech document it says teacher.
Vyshinsky: And in the Russian document journalist?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So the profession does not tally. either?
Hrasche: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: I am interested in the following: You arrived from
Czechoslovakia as a Russian soldier who had been taken prisoner
·during the war?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you did not leave for Czechoslovakia again as
<l Czech prisoner who had been taken prisoner by the Russians?
Hrasche: No, I did not.
Vyshinsky: You went twice to Czechoslovakia?
Hrasche: I was not in Czechoslovakia after 1920.

426

Vyshinsky: And before 1920? The first time you got to Czecho-slovakia from Russia-as who, in what capacity?
Hrasche: The first and only time I got there was as a Czecho.slovakian who had been made a civilian prisoner of war. ·
Vyshinsky: That's just it. You had been a prisoner in Russia,
and you got to Czechoslovakia in the capacity of such a prisoner
of war; then, from Czechoslovakia, you got to Russia as a Russian prisoner of war. Have I understood you correctly?
Hrasche: Not quite.
Vyshinsky: But you yourself said that you were not imprisoned
in any way in Czechoslovakia. Or were you?
Hrasche: I have already said that I left Czechoslovakia in a
fraudulent manner.
Vyshinsky: That is just what I am as:king about. You left in a
fraudulent manner, pretending to be a Russian prisoner of war?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That is all. Did you say this to anybody when you
were joining the Party?
·
Hrasche: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: Did you say who you really were? Did you show
vour true face?
- Hrasche: No.
Vyshinsky: And did you keep these precious documents with
you?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Tell the Court about your Trotskyism.
Hrasche: I have never had anything to do with Trotskyism.
Vyshinsky: Never had anything to do with it?
Hrasche: I came in contact Wti.th .it on the basis of my espionage
and wrecking activities.
Vyshinsky: Ah, I see! From espionage to Trotskyism, then. and
not the other way about. In that case it will be better for you to tell
the Court how you became an agent of the intelligence service.
\\'"hat intelligence service?
Hrasche: When I arrived the first time.
Vgshinsky: What intelligence service?
Hrasche: The last time. . . .
Vyshinsky: Of what intelligence service were you an agent?
Hrasche: Of the German intelligence service.
Vyshinskg: So that's it! In what year?
Hrasche: That was in 1932.
Vyshinsky: Very good, but IJ:>efore 1932 whel'e did you work,
in what institutions?
Hrasche: Before 1932 I first worked after my a~Pival in the
People's Commissariat of Education.
427

Vyshinsky: Jn the People's Commissariat of Education?
H rasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In what capacity?
Hrasche: I worked there in the information department as one>
of the contributors to the Bulletin of the Uni(i.ed School. Then f
worked in the Comintern as a translator from Czech.
Vyshinsky: In the Comintern?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: In what year was that?
Hrasche: That was from May 1921 to May 1922.
Vyshinsky: And before that you did not engage in espionage?
Hrasche: Yes, I want to say. . . .
Vyshinsky: Simply answer: did you or not? Were you engaged
in espionage before that?
Hrasche: I used to receive commisSions to execute.
Vyshin.r;ky: Had you already made contacts as a spy?
H rasche: Yes~
Vyshinsky: When you started work in the People's Commissariat of Education, were you already connected with an espionage
organization?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vhen you started work in the Comintern, were you
already connected with an espionage organization?
Hrasche: Yes.
·
Vyshinsky: And here you say that you did not become an in~
telligence service agent until 1932. I ask you pointblank: Did you
come to the U.S.S.R in 1920 for the purpose of spying?
Hrasche: Yes, quite right.
Vyshinsky: And that was why you performed that manipula·
tion with the prisoners of war, in order to achieve this more easily?'
H rasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vell then, everything is clear now. In what year
did you finally become connected with the German intelligence
service?
Hrasche: With the German intelligence serviice I became connected in 1932.
Vyshinsky: And before that, with what intelligence service
were you connected?
Hrasche: Before that-with the Czechoslovakian intelligence
service.
Vyshinsky: So what is your basic profession?
Hrasche: It would seem that no answer is required . . . .
Vyshinsky: An answer is required. You say you were a teacher,
but you are not a teacher; you say you are an economist, but you
are not an economist; then you make a correction and say that you
428

'\'orked as a journalist, and now I see that you have another profession. \Vhat is it?
Hrasche: A spy.
Vyshinsky: ·with whom of the German intelligence service did
you have personal contact?
·
·
Hrasche: Of the German intelligence service I was in touch
with Meyerowitz, who has already been mentioned here..
Vyshinsky: In order to make it easier for us to conduct the
examination, I ask leave to hand these photographs to the accused
Hrasche to see if he will recognize his old acquaintance among
them.
The President: Accused Hrasche, ten photographs are handed
to you. Is that of Meyerowitz among these photographs?
(The Commandant presents the photographs to the accused
Hrasche. Hrasche looks at the photographs and makes an inscription on one of them.)
Vyshinsky: And is there no other acquaintance there? Show me
please; perhaps there are other familiar faces among them.
(The accused Hrasche, after looking at the photographs, makes
an inscription on another of them.)
Hrasche: I have also recognized the installation mechanic of
the Linde firm-Lenz.
Vyshinsky: What kind of person is he?
Hrasche: He is also an agent of the German intelligence service.
Vyshinsky: \Vere you connected with him?
Hrasche: Yes, I got Mm work at the Komsomoletz Plant in
Tambov.
Vyshinsky: In what capacity?
Hrasche: I got him work there at the instructions of Meyerowitz, as one of the agents of the German intelligence .service for
gathering espionage information and for diversive activities.
Vyshinsky: Well, did he gather the information for you, or
did you gather it for him, or did he gather it for Meyerowitz?
Hrasche: He gathered it for Meyerowitz.
Vyshinsky: And what did you do?
Hrasche: In this case or in general? If you mean in general,
then I too wa:s to gather material for Meyerowitz.
Vyshinsky: Did you gather it?
Hrasche: I handed over the material which I received from
various German spies working in the factories in the guise of
foreign specialists.
Vyshinsky: And on the other hand?
Hrasche: From Rataichak.
Vyshinsky: Were you and Rataichak connected as Trot.5kyi~e's
or as intelligence service agents?

429

Hrasclte: I was wnnected as an intelligence service agent.
Vyshinsky: And were you already a Trotskyite at that time?
Hrasche: No, I was not a Trotskyite.
Vyshinsky: But adhered to Trotskyism?
Hrasche: I regard Trotskyisrn as the sum of certain convictions,
and I, as a spy, am not entitled to have such convictions.
Vysl!insky: I think you said yourself that you were drawn into
a Trotskyite group?
Hrasche: It was here, I may say, that I learned about it for the
first time.
Vyshinsky: So you were simply connected with Rataichak as
with an intelligence service agent?
·
Hrasche: Yes, I supposed that material interest, money interest
was the main thing here.
.
Vyshinsky: Why, di<l you receive money for this?
Hrasche: Yes, I received it from Meyerowitz. Once I received
300 marks from him. He assured me that he had sent another 50()
mar-ks to an address agreed upon. However, I received no confirmation of this.
Vyshinsky: And did you have relatives?
Hrasche: I had and still have.
Vyshinsky: And was not money sent to your relatives?
Hrasche: Yes, I gave him the address of a relative in Czechoslovakia.
Vyshinsky: Whose, exactly?
Hrasche: There was a certain distant relative of mine in Prague
who was to forward the money to my mother..
Vyshinsky: And where did your mother live?
Hrasche: My mother also lived in Prague.
Vyshinsky: And what is the name of that <listant relative of
yours?
Hrasche: Prohaska.
Vyshinsky: And the money was sent through him?
H rasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Meyerowitz sent this money?
Hrasche: As regards the 300 marks he sent in 1932, I received
confirmation that they had been received. Then, in 1935, he assured me that he had sent 500 marks, hut I received no confirmation Qf this.
Vyshinsky: He sent them to the same place, to your mother?
Hrasche: Yes, in the meantime my mother fell ill and died.
Vyshinsky: But who sent money to your mother? Meyerowitz?
Hrasche: She had contact vdth Prohaska.
Vyshinskg: And did Figler send money?
430

H rasche: Al.so.
Vyshinsky: You are not saying everything. Each answer has to·
be dragged out of you. I asked whether you receivoo money several times. You said twice-the first time you received it, and the
second time it was promised_. But it is well known that, in the
words of our Russian saying, "a promise will keep you waiting
seven years." It turns out that Figler did send money.
Hrasche: He also handed it on to my mother.
Vyshinsky. Well, and how much did your mother receive in,
this way?
Hrasche: Probably from 7,000 . to 8,000 Czechoslovakian.
kronen.
Vyshinsky: And then you found yourself enlisted for the Ge1 ·
man intelligence service.
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: So yO'llr mother received this money not from the·
German, but from the Czechoslovakian intelligence service?
Hrasche: She received money through Figler direct.
Vyshinsky: Did you have connections with Trotskyites?
Hrasclze: No.
Vyshinsky: Before you found ypurself in the dock?
Hrasche: I had connections with one Danish Trotskyite--that'
·
is, not with one but with two or three.
Vyshinsky: Did you have connections with the Trotskyites iTh
Moscow?
Hrasche: With engineer Wienfeld.
Vyshinsky: And who else?
Hrasche: Then there were Lund and Nielsen.
Vyshinsky: How did you establish oonnectiorn; with them?
Hrasche: I first established connections with \Vienfeld.
Vyshinsky: Through whom?
Hrasche: Wienfold went to work at the All-Union Committee of'
the Chemical Industry as a foreign specialist. He was enlisted in·
Berlin by Davidson, the former vice-chainnan of the All-Union Committee on Chemical Industries, and, as was said in a letter which,
I afterwards found by chance, Davidson wrote to Norkin that thiSman was close to us in his views.
Vyshinsky: In what views'? You said you were not entitled to
have any views?
Hrasche: This letter did not refer to me: it was addressed toNorkin.
Vyshinsky: So Norkin is entitled to have views?
Hrasche: (Remains silent.)
Vyshinsky: To proceed. Did you live in Moscow in 1935?
431

Hrasche: l did.
Vyshinsky: Did you have a flat?
Hrasche: I had a flat.
Vyshinsky: Did you let anyone make use of your flat for con-spirative purposes?
·Hrasche: Wienfeld made use of this flat as a rendezvous. Wienfeld had previously lived in this flat himself, and he warned me
that various people arriving in Moscow would come there, and
saad: "Send them on to me, or render them assistance if I leave."
Vyshinsky: Assistance in what respect?
Hrasche: In the demands which they might address to me.
Vyshinsky: Did they aiddress any demands to you?
Hrasche: There was such a case in 1935-in September, if I
am not mistaken. A Danish railwayman arrived in the guise of a
foreign tourist, brought me a note from this \Vienfeld, and said that
'he wanted to see Pyatakov, that he had a letter for him, and asked
me to take him to Pyatakov.
Vyshinsky: Well, and how did you do that?
Hrasche: I recollect that this was in the morning; I was going
to my office in the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry, took
him along and told him how to get a pass and find Pyatakov's
. private office.
Vyshinsky: Who was this citizen?
..
Hrasche: I do not at the moment recall his name; he called him·self a Danish railway employee.
Vyshinsky: And he had come to see Pyatakov?
H rasche: Yes.
Vyshinky: Tell the Court, did Rataichak ever come to this
rendezvous in your apartment?
Hrasche: No, he did not.
Vyshinsky: Did you arrange any secret meetings for Ratai:chak?
Hrasche: I arranged for Rataichak to meet Meyerowitz in Rataichak's own office.
Vyshinsky: That is to say, you ·took Meyerowitz to that office?
-were you not afrarid of being caught there?
Hrasche: The interview with Meyerowitz was arranged to look
1ike a business talk.
Vyshinsky: How, exactly?
Hrasche: Meyerowitz at that time offered on behalf of a certain
firm equipment for a nitrogen plant. This served as a pretext for the
:interview.
Vyshinsky: Why could he not mdnage without you? He could
have written them a note, offered them his services somehow?
432

Hrasche: I was there in charge of foreign affairs . . . .
Vyshinsky: Very convenient.
Hrasche: And. it was easier for me to make an appointment
\vith Meyerowitz by telephone, etc., than it would have been for
him.

Vyshinsky: So you were managing the foreign department as
an expert in your special line?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: May I question Rataichak?
The President: You may.
Vyshinsky (to Rataichak): Do you remember the meeting with
~Ieyerowitz arranged by Hrasche?
·
Rataichak: The conversation was about placing orders for
equipment.
Vyshinsky: \Vas this the real reason for the interview?
Rataichak: Meyerowitz, who· had been suitably coached by
Hrasche, asked whether he could see the plans for the new con~truction jobs and I answered in the affirmative and told him that
he could get the necessary information from Hrasche. There the
conversation ended, and I told Hrasche in his turn to give the
necessary data lo Meyerowitz.
Vyshinsky: Did Meyerowitz himself tell you that he was acquainted with Yush'kevich?
Rataichak: No, his acquaintance came about later, roughly in
~!arch 1935.
Vyshinsky (to Hrasche): Do you know Yushk_evich?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Through intelligence work?
Hrasche: In intelligence work I was connected with him approximately since the middle of 1935.
Vyshinsky: Did you take part in any diversive acts?
Hrasche: I personally did not take part, but I know that one
of the. German specialists, director Wainow, was apparently the
man who engineered llhe breakdown at the Berezniki Combined
Chemical Works.
Vyshinsky: How do you know this?
Hrasche: I know that after all that, he returned to Moscow in a
very excited state and asked· me to .get him across the border as
quickly as possible.
Vyshinsky: And did you do this?
Hrasche: I did it.
Vyshinsky: Why did you try to get him across quickly?
Hrasche: Because I had received appropriate instructions on
this matter.
433

Vyshins'ky: Thal he had to be packed off as quickly as possible?
Hrasche: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And you did this?
Hrasche: I did.
Vyshinsky: And there was no direct participation in diversive
acts on your part?
Hrasche: Not personally on my part.
Vyshinsky: Did you know about it?
Hrasche: I heard about the breakdowns, but I was not sure
that they were the result of acts of diversion.
Vyshinsky: Did not Rataichak tell you anything about diversive or wrecking work?
Hrasche: At the first meeting he spoke a.bout it i.n general, but
not explkitly.
Vyshinsky: ·what did he say?
Hrasche: That the organization was pursu·ing this .sort of
wrecking and diversive aims.
Vyshinsky: \Vas that when he recruited you?
Hrasche: It was the time when he said that he was aware of
my connection with Meyerowitz, which had started before my conversation with him, and that I must continue to carry out this
work, must carry out espionage work.
Vyshinsky: I have no more_questions.
The Pre!.ident: T,he Court certifies that the photograpb._o.f th~.
citizen whom the a-ccused Hrasche has indentified as Meyerowitz
is quite identical with the photograph attached to the ~ntranc~
permit file of the Foreign Section of 1\he Aldministrative Department
of the Presidium of the Moscow Regional Executiv·e Committee
and with the photograph on the certificate.
Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
Norkin: I have a question. I heard Hrasche mention my name
in connection with some letter.
The Pre.<iident: Accused Hrasche, will you repeat what you said
about Norkin.
Hrasche: I said that in the middle of 1932, on my return from
my vacation, I found in my desk a letter belonging to my predecessor addressed to "Dear Boris" and signed "Davidson," in
whi-ch Davidson, who was a1broad, among other thiin.gs, informed
Nol'kin that he had enlisted a specialist, "a man who stood close to
us in his views," and asked Norkin to secure his appointment
through Y. L. Pyata:kov.
.
The President (to Norkin}:, Are you satisfied with the reply?
Norkin: \Vhen was that ietter received?
434

Hrasche: In all probability Davidson despatched that letter
from Berlin in ~lay, or the beginning of June, 1932. I foun-d it at
the end of July, or beginning of August, when I returned from my
vacation.
Norkin: Permit me to say something.
The President: Put it briefly, please.
Norkin: I understood that this was an instruction from
foreign specialists who were connecte.d with espionage activities.
In this connection I want to say the following: In the first place,
as far as I know, Davidson never had any connection with
Trotskyism.
Vyshinsky: Do you know all those who were Trotskyiles?
Norkin: I do not know . . . .
Vyshinsky: N<llbody is accusing you of that.
Norkin: This somewhat compromises me, the fact that I was
connected with this man.
Vyshinsky: You have been compromi<>ed quite a bit. Have you
read the indictment?
Norkin: Yes.
Vyshinsky: You are a,ccused of what is stated in the indictment.
Norkin: But not of this?
The President: Accused Hrasche, what is the correct date of
your birth? \\1 hen the indictment was handed to you, you told
the secretary that you were born in 1886, and not in 1880. You
altered it. To-day you said, not 1886, but 1880. When were you
really born?
Hrasche: Permit me to explain. \Vhen the indictment was
handed to me I fo~nd that, the date of my birth was given as
1890. I said that the date of birth in my passport was 1880, but
that actually I was born in 1886.
The President: That is why we put your date of birth according to what you say it is: 1886.
Vyshinsky: And so, when were you finally born?
Hrasche: Finally, in 1886.
The President: \Ve shall now proceed to examine the accused
Pushin. Accused Pushin: do you confirm the testimony you gave at
the preliminary investigation. and in the office of the Procurator
of l!he Union in January this year?
Pushin: Yes.
The President: Comrade Vyshinsky, have you any questions
to put to the accused?
Vyshinsky (to Pushin): What do you plead guilty to?
Pushin: I plead guilty to the fact that having been recruited
for the counter-revolutionary, Trotskyite organization by Ra435

taichak in the beginning of 1934, I remained a member of this organization until my _arrest; that on the instructions of Rataichak
I committed three acts of diversion at the Gorlovka \Vorks, took
part in the wrecking work that was carried on in connection with
factory designing, and lastly, that~ on the instructions of the same
Rataichak, I han<led to the German spy, the fitter Lenz, three
secret documents. This briefly, so to speak, in the briefest possible
terms, is what I plead guilty to.
Vyshinslcy: And to the fact that you also recruited various persons for the Trotskyite organization? Which of the persons you recruited for undermining work can y-0u name?
Pushin: · The technical director of the Gorlovka Chemical
Works, engineer Tamm.
Kommodov: I have a question to put to Pushin. When did you
commit the act of diversion at the Godovka \Vorks?
Pushin: In November 1935.
Kommodov: And did you commit· any wrecking or diversive
acts in 1936?
Pushin: No. After Decemiber 1935 I did not commit a single
act of a criminal character. I ~ade great efforts to resign from
work at the Central Administration of the Chemical Industry and
went to Georgia.
Kommodov: In your new situation, did you utilize your position in a bad- direction?
Pushin: On the contrary, I tried to work as well as possible
in order to wipe out this criminal stain.
Kommodov: I have another question to put to you. Did you have
dealings only with Rataichak, or with anyone in a higher position? Did you have any dealings with Pyata:kov?
Pushin: No.
Kommodov: Did you have occasion to speak with anybody
higher than Rataichak?
.Pushin: No.
Kommodov: When were you arrested?
Pushin: I was arrested on October 22, and from the very first
moment I was ~rought up from ·my cell for interrogation I confessed.
Kommodov: Did you confess under interrogation, or did you
write your own statement?
Pushin: Before any evidence or questions were put to me I
asked for paper and pen and wrote a statement to the People's
Commissar of Internal Affairs, Yezhov, in which I confessed aU
my crimes.
Kommodov:_I have no more questions.
The President: The Court certifies that there is in the records
436

in Pushin's own handwriting a statement addressed to Comrade
Yezhov and dated October 22, 1936, in which Pushin says the following: "Being arrested on the night of October 22, 1936, I consider it my duty immediately, without pondering long over the
matter, to tell about the counter-revolutionary organisation in the
chemical industry into whioh I was drawn, to tell about its criminal activities, and about the part I took in them. By my confession and sincere repentance I hope to expiate the crime
I committed against the Party and against my country.
Pushin."
· Vyshinsky (to Pushin): How long did you carry out the functions of informer for the German intelligence service?
Pushin: I was informer for the German intelligence service
during the first part of 1935 to the m1dd~e of 1935.
Vyshinsky: From what date?
Pushin: From the end o.f 1934 or beginning of 1935 to the
middle of 1935.
Vyshinsky: When did you carry on your diversive adivities?
Pushin: There were three acts of diversion. One was in April
193-1.

Vyshinsky: And before that?
Pushin: I was only recruited for the organization in February
1934.
Vyshinsky: At that time you were a member of the Party?
Pushin: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And when did you engage in espionage work?.
Pushin: Up to the middle of 1935.
Vyshinsky: What stopped you?
Pushin: I had no practical instructions, as the person with
whom I was connected, Lenz, had gone.
Vyshinsky: Hence, you ceased your activities, not because of
remorse but because no practical proposals were made to you?
Pus/tin: Yes.
.
Vyshinsky: 'Vhy did you not engage in espionage work in
1936? Of course, I welcome the fact that you retired from it, but I
would like to know why.
Pushin: Since I am given the opportunity of speaking, not
only about facts, but also moods and sentiments. . . .
Vyshinsky: 'Ve will leave moods and sentiments aside. What
interests me are facts. Why did you not carry out any espionage
tasks or commissions in 1935? You have already told us that
there wt-,re no practical proposa.<ls. But were there any proposals
of this kind in 1936?
·
437

Pushin: I left the place and received no instructions; I never
operated on my own initiative.
Vyshinsky: Hence, you had no·occasion to do so?
Pushin: No.
Vyshinsky: Did you tell anybody that you had sins, crimes, on
your soul bdore you were taken to the People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs?
Pushin: I kept.all my feelings to myself. . . .
Vyshinsky: I am not asking you abO'llt your feelings, I am
asking you whether you told anybody or nqt.
Pushin: I did not tell anybody.
Vyshinsky: Hence, before your arrest you made no statement
at all on this matter?
Pushin: No.
Vyshinsky: So it was only when. you found yourself in the
People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs that your "feelings"
began to assert themselves?
Pushin: That is correct.
Vyshinsl:y: Thus, the statement you sent to Comrade Yezhov
was ·made, not before your arrest, but a:fter your :urest?
Pushin: Yes.
.
Vyshinsky: Perhaps at that time you began lo fear the outcome, that you would have to meet your bills.
·Pushin: :r-rnust give a dHferent explanation. The point is that
by the end of 1935 the very fact of my being in the organization
had clearly revealed to me what an abyss I had reached, and my
sufferings at the time, I felt .....
Vg~hinsky: Having rea•lized that, what should you have done?
You should have gone and made a statement. But you did not do
that?
Pushin: No.
Vyshinsky: And since you did not go and make a statement,
all the rest loses significance.
Pushin: Quite true. But since you asked' me whether I macic
my statement in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs
because I '''as frightened. . . .
Vyshinsky: I did not say you were frightened; what I said was,
perhaps you began to feel a sense of responsi!bilily.
Pushin: Do you consider that was fear of punishment?
Vyshinsky: You will tell us rubout that in your last p.'l.ea. \Vhat
interests me is only one question: what objective fads, circumstances, can you bring forward to prove tihat you had rid yourself
of these crimes in the middle of 1935.
Pushin: I c~n point to one objective fact. In April 1936 I ar-

438

rived at the Kamensky \Vorks where, as I said at the ~eginning,
I had recmited two men.

l'yshinsky: What for?
Pushin: For \\Tecking \vork. Had I rdained the convictions
that I had had before, when I recruited them, I would have taken
ad,·antage of my being at the works to speak to them, to give them
definite tasks and instrudions. All I did was to greet them from
a dist:mce and go away.
Vysliinsky: Did you inform anybody about them at that time?
· Pushin: I have already said that I did not inform anybody.
Vyshinsky: Hence, you simp'ly did not think it wise to speak
to them?
Pushin: Not that. I did not think it was unwise lo speak to
them the first time. And the second time I could not speak to them
for other reasons.
Vyshinsky: In a word, you have no objective facts?
Pushin: If by objective facts you mean only coming to confess before arrest, then I have no such facts.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions.
The Pre:::ident: Have Counsel for Defence any questlons?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
The President (to the Commandant): Please, ask witness Tamm
to come in.
(\Yitness Tamm enters the Court)
The President: Is your name Tamm?
Tamm: Yes.
The President: Leonid Evgenievich?
Tamm: Yes.
The President: \Vhat was the last past you occupied?
Tomm: Deputy Chief Engineer of the Central Administration
of the Nitrogen Industry.
The President: You have been ca1led as a witness in the case
of Pyatakov, Radek, Serebryakov and other6 and you must give
truthful evidence.
Tamm: Permit me, Citizen President. to make a statement. J
would ask that I be examined in camera as l have weighty
grounds for this. If you will allow me, I will put them in writing.
The President: There are· a number of questions that we will
have to examine in camera, but there are a number of questions
which comrade the Procurator will put to you which can be examined in open court.
l'yslzinsky: I consider that we can deal in open court with
the part which is not secret: connections between the witness and
the accused Pushin, acts of -diversion, and so forth, without going
into <lftails and !he rfst ran be examined in camera.
439

The President: Please put your q:.iestionc;.
Vyshinsky (to Tamm): Tell me pleast:, how old are you?
Tamm: Thirty-five, I will be thirty-six.
Vyshinsky: If you are thirty-five, of course you.will ·bethirty-six.
Tamm: I mean that I will be thirty-six within a few days.
Vyshinsky: How many years have you been engaged in the
nitrogen industry?.
Tamm: Since 1928.
Vyshinsky: Until lately you occupied the post of Chief of the
Production Department?
·Tamm: Until lately I occupied the post of deruty chief engineer of the nitrogen industry.
Vyshinsky: In Moscow?
Tamm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: How long were you employed at the Gorlovka
Works?
Tamm: From 1932 to February 1936
Vyshinsky: Did you know Pushin?
Tamm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Who introduced yCYU to him?
Tamm: I made Pushin's acquaintance when I first arrived at
the Gorlovka Nitrate Fertilizer Works, if I ain not mistaken, in
June or July 1932, when Ulanov invited me to work with him in
the capacity of t~hnical director of that plant.
Vyshinsky: How did you learn of PuS1hiri's criminal activities?
Tamm (remains silent for a few moments): I worked with
Pushin from the autumn of 1932, from September, approximately,
until his departure from Gorlovka, until the middle of 1933.
·
. Vyshinsky: I am asking you, where <lid you learn about
Pushin's criminal activities, and do you know about them?
Tamm: I will come to that in a moment.
Vyshinsky: But you are not coming to it.
Tamm: He himself told me.
Vyshinsky: In what connection did Pushin start to te<ll you
about his crimes?
Tamm: Pushin and I had had a number of anti-Soviet talks.
Vyshinsky: How did you come to have these talks?
Tamm: I knew that his sentiments were anti-Soviet.
Vyshinsl.:y: How did you know?
Tamm: It was evident from all his conversations, from the
remarks he dropped .
. Vyshinsky: \Vas he a member of the Party?
Tamm: Yes.
Vyshfrzsky: An<l were you?
I,
'Tamm: I was non-Party.
440

l'yshinsky: And you, being non-Party, suddenly noticed that
a member of the Party was expressing anti-Soviet opinions?
Tamm: Yes. On one -of my visits to Moscow, this was in February 1934, I went to see him at the Central Ad.ministration of the
Chemical Industry on business connected with my plant, and
there he definitely invited me to engage in diversive activities. I
consented:
T:yshinsky: You agreed with him?
Tamm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Did he give you any commissions to carr.y out?
Did yau carry them al!l otit?
Tamm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: That was in 1934?
Tamm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: And in 1935?
Tamm: In 1935 he gave me another commis:sion to carry out.
Vyshinsky: \Vhich you also succeeded in carrying out?
Tamm: Yes.
l"yshinskg: Was that at the beginning of 1935 or at the end?
Tamm: I received the commission in the middle of the year
and· carried H out at the end.
Vyshinsky: · \Vhat do you think: can we take it that Pushin
adhered to the diversionist_position during the whole of 1935?
Tamm: I think we can.
Vyshinsky: Did you meet him at any time during 1935?
Tflmm: I met him after the last act of diversion; in November
1935.
.
Vyshinsky: Antl where did Pushiin go after that?
Tamm:· He went to the Rion.
Vyshinsky: \Vhat were his sentiments when he went to the
J:lion.
·
Tamm: I had no OIJ'portunity of speaking with Pushin about·
that.
Vyshinsky: Did you meet Pushin after that?
Tamm: I met 'him twi•ce at the CentralJ. A<l:ministration of the
Nitrogen Industry in 1936.
Vyshinsky: \Vas there any talk about diversive acts?
Tamm: No, we dlid not d~scuss fhat.
Vyshinsky: ''7hat were his sentiments?
Tamm: The meetings were very short, so we hardly had any
opportunity to talk.
Vyshinsky: You met as ol<ll acquaintances, friends?
Tamm: We met at .the Central Administration of the Nitrogen
Industry for a few minutes only and we held no conversation.
Vyshinsky: Did you regard him as an -0ld conspirator, or did
441

you think, or did you have reason to think, that he had ceased
these activities?
Tamm: I did not ta.lk to him about that.
Vyshinsky: So you cannot say anything to characterize
Pushfo in 1936?
Tamm: No.
Vyshinsky: Have you met him sjnce then?
Tamm: The last time I saw him was shortly before my arrest.
Vyshinsky: When was that?
Tamm: I think the last time I saw him was in the beginning
of October 1936.
Vyshinsky: In the beginning of October 1936?
Tamm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Had anything changed, did you notice any
symptoms?
Tamm: I had no opportunity to speak to him.
Vyshinsky: The acts of diversiion on Pushin's instructi0n
were carried out under your personal direction?·
Tamm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: \Vho carried them out?
Tamm: They were carried out by Assinovsky, Khalezov,
Dratch, Kruschclnitsky.
Vyshinsky: Did you report to Pushin how they carried them
out'!
....
··

Tomm: Yes.
Vyshinsky: .Was he pleased?
Tamm: He dlid not express displeasure.
Vyshinsky: Did he give you any further commissions?
Tamm: Not after the last one.
Vyshinky: No, after the first one'?
Tamm: After !the first one he did.
Vyshinsky: He d<i.d after the first one, but after the last one,
since it was executed, he did not give any more, hence he was
satisfied, hen~c he regarded it as right, and was satisfied. I have
no more questions. .
The President: Ad'.journmient for 20 minutes.

*

*

*

The Pr€sidcnt: The examination of the accused is finished.
The examination of the witnesses is also finished. Are there any
supplementary questions?
.
Vyshinsky: I have a question to put to Pyatakov. Accused
Pyatako:v, please tell me, you travelled in an airplane to Norway to meet Trotsky. Do you know in whkh airdrome you
landed?

Pyatakov: Near Oslo.
Vyshinsky: Did you have any difficulties about the landing
or admission of the airplane to the airdrome?
Pyatakov: I was so excited by the unusual nature of the
journey that I d~<l not pay attention.
Vyshinsky: Have you heard of a place called Kjeller or
Kjellere?
Pyatakov: No.
Vyshinsky: You confirm that you landed in an airdrome near
Oslo?
Pyatakov: Near Oslo, that I remember.
_
Vyshinsky: I have no more ques.Uons. I ihave an application
to the Court. I interested myself in this matter and1 asked the
People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs to -make an inquiry,
for I wanted to verify Pyatakov's evidence from this side too.
I have received an official communication which I ask fo have pul
in the records. (Reads.)
"The consular Department of the People's Commissari:lt of
Foreign Affairs hereby informs the Procurator of the U.S.S.R.
that ·according to information received by the Embassy of the
U.S.S.R. in Norway the Kjellere Airdrome near Oslo receives all
the year round, in accordance with international regulations, airp1anes of other countries. and that the arrival and <leparture of
airplanes is possible also in winter months."
(To Pyatakov.) It was in December?
_Pyatakov: Exactly.
Vyshinsky: I ask that th-is be placed in the records. Now a
question to accused Radek.
The President: Ask it.
Vyshinsky: Accused Radek, tell us, did a certain person visit
you at your country house near Moscow?
Radek: As I have a1lready tes1tified, in the summer of 1935 I
was visited by that very diplomatic representative of that Central
European country who .first soundled me in his conversation with
me in 1934.
Vyshinsky: Did he arrive and converse with you in anybod~,·s presence, or were you alone?
Radek: No, Bukharin w.as with me at the time. We were
sitting on the veranda when a car drove up and through the
window I siaw this gentleman whom I knew, and two other
persons unkno'Wll to me. As I had not received any previous
warning of this visit I was surprised. He began to explain his
visit by stating that he had been visited by two persons who
would probably interest me, a professor at the Konigsberg University and t~c adviser to one of the leaders of one of the pro-

443

vinccs of that country, who ought to int~rest me beeause_ the
attitude of Konigsberg towards Russia is different than, say,
Rosenberg's because Prussia is afraid of Poland, does not trust
her and that is why she is more interested in active relations with
the U.S.S.R.
_
I listened to all he said and as we had agreed not to enter into
any negotiations with these representatives here except to give
our visa to Trotsky's mandate, and as I could not tell him why,
the only thing I could do was to start to make fun of him. We
started a wran1gle over the race question. Then, these representatives, realizing that we did not iintendJ to enter into the conversation for_ the sake of which they_ had some to see. me, departed!.
This visit had a sequel. Either the diplomatic agent could not
understand why he was received in this way, or the persons
at the back of him wanted to find out what this meant, whether
~my change had taken place in the attitude of the bloc towards
that country. Several months later, approximately, November
1935, at one of the regular <liplomatk receptions, the military
representative of that country. . . .
.
The President: Do not mention lhis IlJame or the country .
. Railek: .. ·: approachedl me and began to complain about
the complete change of atmosphere between the two countries. After the first few words he said that during Mr. Trotsky's
time the relations betwe"en the armies of the two -·countries
were better.
He went on to say that Trotsky had :remained true to· his
old opinion about the need for Soviet-German friendshlp. After
speaking in this strain for a little while longer he began to press
me hard as one who had formerly pursued the Rappalo line. i
replied to this by uttering the same formulla which I had uttered
when I was first sounded, namely, thiat the realist politicians
of the U.S.S.R. appre<Ciate the signifioaince of Soviet-Germ.an
friendship and la.re prepared to make the necessary concessions
in order to ensure this friendslhip. To· this he replied that we
ought at last to get together somehow and jointly discuss the
details, definitely, about ways of reaching a rapprochement.
I told him that when the circumstances permitted! I would
be glad to spend an eviening· ·willh him. Thd.s second conversation revealed to me that there was an attempt on the part of
milifairy circles to take over the connections which Trotskv. had
established with certain circles in Germany, or that it was an attempt to verify the real content of the negotiations that were being
conducted. Perhaps, also, it was an attempt to ascertain fhether
we knew definitely what Trotsky had proposed.

444

l'yshinsky: Did you ever speak to Pyatakov, or with someonl! else, about the date when the possible war would approach?
Radek: When Pyata.kov returned from Oslo I put a number
of questions to him concerning foreign policy. He informed me
that, first, Trotsky had told him that it was not a matter of a
fiYe-year period, not a matter of five years, but of one year, or,
at most, of two years. It was a matter of war in 1937. Then I
asked Pyatakov: "Did Trotsky tell you this as his own assumption?" Pyatakov rep1iedl: "No, Trotsky said that he had gort this
in· his conversation with Hess and other semi-official persons in
Germany with whom he ha:d dealings." Hence it was a directive
giving an orientation for a very definite date.
I asked him: "So it is a matter of a separate war against
the U.S.S.R. ?" To this Pyatakov replied that Trotsky had spoken
about war in 1937 in general without separating the attack on
the U.S.S.R. from the general developments. And when I asked
Pyatakov how did Trotsky exactly picture to himself the development of events, Pyatakov replied that Trotsky had said:
:\Iilitary prepariartions had been completed a'Ild 1nosw it was a
matter of securing to Germ:my the diplomatic means. That
would take a year. And he said that the object of these diplomatic strivings were, first, to secure British neutrality. Secondly,
either Germany would come to an arrangement with France, or,
relying upon the growing fascist movement which would weaken
the democratic government of France, she would be ab.le, under
favourable circumstances, to put France out of action for a
long time by a swift blow, and strike at t!he U.S.S.R. with concentrated forces. This was the second fact communicated by
Prntakov.
- The third point that emerged from Trotsky's conversation
"ith Pyatakov was t111a:t Germany ·demanded complete freedom
of action for the advance of Germany to the Balkan and Danube
countries. This is also a very important faot.
Vyshinsky (to Py;atakov): Did you say that? Do you confirm that?
.
Pyatakov: Yes. Radek is relating it very exactly. It !is all
quite true.
.
Vyshinsky: I have no more questions.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any supplementary questions to put to the accused?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: Comrade Monosovich, are the answers ready to
the questions submitted by the Procurator?
Monosovich: They are ready. (Reads.)
' 445

"Answers of the Expert lVitness J!onosovich to the Questions Submitted by Comrade Vyshinsky, Procurator of
the U.S.S.R.
"1. In Connection with the Explosion which occurred on
November 11, 1935, in the Hydrogen Department of the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works.
- "a. What were the immediate causes of the explosion of
the nitrogen ctpparatus in the chambers of the hydrogen department of the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works on
November 11, 1935?
"Reply:
"The immediate cause of the explosion of the nitrogen
apparatus in the chambers was the accumulati-01n of acetylene
in the condemers and in the isolating ·material of the apparafus.
"The accumulation of acetylene was due to the following causes:
"1. The fan for the intake of air from higher layers
of the atmosphere ''"as not functioning, and as a result the
air was sucked in from the room itself, and therefore had a
major acetylene content.
"2. Owing to the fact that the fan was not functioning,
a vacuum was formed in the suction line of the air compressors, which resulted in the 'intake of air contaminated with
acetylene from the surrounding atmosphere along the whole
air line. This air was contaminated with acetylene especially
owing to the fact that welding operations with ·the help· of
:,i.cetylenie generators were being performed in the vicinity of
the department.
"3. According to the technical record of the factory and
the explanation given by engineer Tamm, before the explosion occurred the nitrogen apparatus had ,ibeen working for
fifteen days with the auxiliary condenser cut out, and furthermore no analyses for determining the acetylene content in
the liquid oxygen were made (for several days there were
even no reagents available). The draining of the liquid
oxygen from the main condenser was either not performed
at all, or not frequently enough. "b. Could this explosion have been averted?
"Reply:
"Unquestionably. All that was required was to observt
the regulations obligatory during operation which ensun
normal and safe work on these installations, namely, tha1
446

the intake of the air must be from higher layers of the atmosphere, that systematic analyses of the liquid oxygen must
be made, and that _the Iiqmd oxygen must be systematically
drained from the condenser.
"c. lVas the explosion due to accident or to malicious
intent?
"Reply:
"If the obligatory regulations governing operations had
been observed and an explosion had taken place, it might
have been attributed to accident. In the present case, when
the regulations were absolutely ignored and every condition
favouring an explosion was thus created, it cannot be called
an accident. That there was malicious intent is beyond dispute.
"d. Do the explanations 9iuen at the preliminary investigation by the witness Tamm as to the circumstances and
causes of the explosion correspond to the actual technical
information in the possession of the experts?
"Reply:
"Yes, on the whole they do.
"2. In Connection with the Explosion which occurred on
April 7, 1934, at the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertili=er Works.
"a. What were the immediate· causes of the explosion?
"Reply:
"The explosion was caused by the oxy-acetylene cutting
of the connecting pipes for the recording instrumerits. Since
the mixture is explosive, the welding or cutting of pipes filled
with gas, unless they are preliminarily blown through, is cate.gorically forbidden. In the present case the cutting was performed without the line having been preliminarily blowll
through, which led to an explosion.
"b. Does the testimony given at the preliminary investigation by the witness Tamm and the accused Pushin as to
the circumstances and causes of this explosion correspbnd
with the technical information in the possession of the experts?
"Reply:
"It does.
"c. Was tlie explosion due to accident or to malicious
intent?
"Reply:
"In view of the existence of strictly prohibitive instruc447

tions and special permission to perform such work from the
technical director or the superintendent of the departmentthe fact that these instructions were ignored· cannot be regarded as accidental, but must be regarded as due to malicious intent.
"3. In Connection with the Collapse of the Gas Line at
the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works on November 14,
1934.
.
"a. What were the causes of the collapse of the gas line at
the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertflizer Works?·
"Reply:
"The collapse of the gas line was due to an-excessive accumulation of water inside the pipes (nearly 13 tons). The accumulation of water was due to the fact that the condensate
was not drained off from the gas liine. Two of the draining outlets were closed. The water accumulated in the lower
part of the gas line, the accumulated water filling as much as
two-thirds of the internal cross section of the gas line and increasing the vek>city of the gas to 16~20 metres per second.
"The resulting vibration of the whole construction and the
hydraulic impact increased the tension of the metal beyond
the flow point, with the result that the gas line was shattered.
'.':b. Does the test(mony given at the preliminary investigation by the witness Tamm and ·the accused Pushin as to the
circumstances and causes of the collapse correspond to the
actual technical information in the possession of the experts?
"Reply:
"It does.
"e. Was the collapse due to accident or to malicious intent?
"Reply:
"The collapse of the gas line cannot be regarded as due to
accident. The drumming noise in the gas line ·due to excessive
accumulation of water was heard in the plant for 31h hours
before the gas line collapsed. The immediate drainage of the
water and the stopping of the compressors until the condensate had been drained off were indispensable technical measures. The fact that these measures were not taken by skilled
engineers like Tamm anid Khalezov points to the malicious
intent of their actions, whioh resulted in the collapse of the
gas line."
Vyshinsky (to Monosovich): I request you to explain the reply
to the following question (reads): "Do the explanations given at
448

the preliminary investigation by the witness Tamm as to the circumstances and causes of the explosion correspond to the actual
technical information in thie possession of the experts?"
The expert witness, Monosovich, says; "Yes, on the whole they
do:· \\'hat does this mean?
Monosovich: I want to say the following; that in his testimony
the witness Tamm stated t'.ha•t for three or four days before the
explosion no analysis had been made to ascertain the content of
acetylene in the liquid oxygen, whereas in the technical report
which we found among the materials of the plant it is \Stated that
no records of analyses were to be found in the journals since
September 2, so that, ~ccording to the entries, n-0 analyses were
made for nine days. According to the witness Tamm, however, no
analyses were made for three or four days. Hence,. in the main,
the technical material coincides, but there is a disicrepancy on
this point.
Vyshinsky: This means that on the whole actually no analyses
were made?
M onosovich: Yes.
Vyshinsky: But there is a discrepancy as to the period. So, according to the explanation of the accused Pushin, the period was
a fairly short one?
J!onosovich: Yes.
Vyshinsky: Is it advisable to have analyses made over longer
periods or shorter periods in order to avoid accid-ents?
J.fonosovich: Ill order to avoiid accidents it is advisable to have
them in shorter periods.
Vyshinskg: Can it be taken to mean that these analyses were
made three days before the explosion?
lifonosovich: According to his statement analyses were made
three or four days before the explosion.
Vyshinsky: But according to the materials?
Monosovich: According to the materials it appears that no
analyses had been made for eleven days before the explosion, and
the longer the period the greater the danger.
l'yshinsky: Hence, in your opinion the situation was even
worse and more dangerous than depicted by the accused?
Jfonosovich: Actually more dangerous.
The President: Have Colinsel for Defence any questions?
Kommodov: What period is stipulated in the regurrations?
Monosovich: According to the regulations there should be two
samplings in every shift.
Kommodov: That means twice a day.
The President: Accused Pushin, have you any questions?
Pushin: This was not the testimony of the ace-used' but that of

449

the witness Tarrirn. In my testimony I stated that no analyses had
been made for ten days.
·
_
·
Monosovich: This was shown in Tamm's documents. ~
Vyshinsky: I ask you to--:iote the fact th.at th~ question Iself
was formulated as follows: is the explanation given by w ess
Tamm at the preliminary investigation in accordance with the
circumstances and ,the causes of the explosion. The reply: "In
the main it is," applies to Tamm, Pushin has nothing to do with
it.
Kommodov: In another instance we have Tamm and Pushin.
Vyshinskg: l3ut Pushin confirms that no analysis had been
made for ten days.
Kommodov: Am I to understand that in the other instance
where we had the testimony of both Pushin and Tamm, their explanations coincide?
llf onosovich: They coincide.
The President: Have you any more questions?
Vyshinsky: No.
·
The President: Comrade Lekus will give his findings.
Lekus: On the request of the investigating authorities a number of committees of experts made investigations in the Kuzbas.
during the months of October, November and December 1936, in
connection with the criminal acti~ities of accused Shestov and
Stroilov in the Kuzbas, as had already betn formulated. These committees of experts have studied a large quantity of factual
material collected at the offices of the mines. In addition they visited
all the pits they considered it necessary to visit in t_he process of
their investigations and themselves examined the workings to
which the particular material referred.
And there was the committee which studied all the material
collected at the mines in the Kuzbas. This committee consisted of
mining engineer Gorbachov, mining technician Dmitrov, and myself.
In connection with the questions put by the State Prosecutor.
Procurator of the Union, Comrade Vys.hinsky, and confirmed by
the Court, in order to find the reply to these questions I examined
all the material which I now submit to the Court.
I will now give my answer. (Reads)

"Answers to the questions submitted by the State Prosecutor,
Comrade Vyshinsky, Procurator of the U.S.S.R., and
endorsed by the Court, to the expert witness Lekus in connectton with the criminal activities of the accused Shestov
and Stroilov in the Kuzbas;
450

"A. Pit Fires in the Prokopgevsk Colliery
"1. What were tlze causes of the fires?
"The underground fires arose as the result of:
"a. The use of the chamber-and-pillar system of mining
with natural subsidence of the roof, and of the system of
zones with inter-zonal pillars and with natural subsidence
of the roof in the working of rich seams.
"The coal remaining underground was subject to conditions favouring spontaneous heating followed by spontaneous combustion.
''b. The incorr~ct technical application of the above-mentioned systems of mining, natural subsidence, which results
in a sharp increase in the number of emergency removals of
rock. (See records, Vol. XLIV, pp. 68, 73-74.)"

Then there is a paragraph which I request should be read in
camera.
·The President: Very well.
Lekus: I have an explanation to make in connection with point
b) of my findings. The fact of the matter is that the system itself
was incorrect and inexpedient, but it might have been used if care
had been taken to organize the work as well as possible, whereas
here we have a bad system badly applied. (Reads)
"c. Non-application of the methods of filling in the workedout cavities."
The President: Read us your table.
Lekus (reads) :
"Worked·out

By the filling-in
system
per cent

"In 1934
"In 1935
"In 1936
"(See Vol. XL VI, p. 20.)"

5.12
3.12
4.17

By the subsidence
system
per cent

94.88
96.88
95.83

Comrade President, need I read the reference to the corresponding volumes and pages, or is that not necessary?
The President: It is not necessary to read the references.
Lekus: "Point 2-Consequences of these fires."-In view of the
confidential character of the first paragraph, permit me to read it
in camera.
In view of the confidential character of the first paragraph of
the second question (on asphyxiation), I request permission of the
Court to read it in camera. _(Reads) :
451

"2. What were the consequences of these fires?

"a. In can1era.
"b. In camera.
"c. The presence of so many underground fires in the upper levels of the rich steeply-inclined seams of the Prokopyevsk Colliery renders it extremely difficult to work the
lower levels. Furthermore, until the underground fires are ex. tinguished, work in the lower levels under the seats of the
fires is accompanied iby extreme danger to the people working
in the mines.
"d. Both the outbreak of new fires and the existence of
old fires complicate and disorganize mining work, disrupt
the fulfilment of the plans of coal-getting and increase the
cost of the coal.
"3. Could these fires have been averted?
"As a rule, the a·doption of rational systems of mining,
and in particular the filling-in of the worked-out cavities,
practically eliminates all possibility of the outbreak of underground fires.
"At the Prokopyevsk Colliery it was possible to perform
filling-in work by the most elementary methods until such
time as equipment was installed for the mechanical filling-in
of worked-out cavities. (Vol. XLIV, p. 56.)
"It was possible to expedite the installation of temporary
mechanical filling-in methods, yet the money assigned for
this purpose was not utilized. (Vol. XLIV, p. 43.)
"Hence it was possible to avert the fires. This possibility
was not utilized deliberately.

"B. State of the Ventilatfon in the Prokopyevsk Colliery
"The ventilation of the pits at the colliery is in an extremely bad and disorganized state and cannot ensure the
normal performance of mining work.
"1. What were the causes of the bad state of the ventilation?
"a. The construction of the ventilation shafts lagged far
behind the sinking of the main shafts, resulting in the creation of blind stopes without artificial ventilation.
"b. The air supplied by the main fans was distributed to
the sections and slopes extremely unevenly.
"c. The portable fans were so placed as to create the circulation of a curr~nt of vitiated air.
"d. Ventilation partitions and doors were not built and

452

not repaired in time, lhe result of which was a leakage of
air and disturbance of the ventilation system.
"e. The adoption of artificial ventilation was delayed.
"2. What were the consequences of the bad state of the
ventilation?
"a. In camera.
"Asphyxiation with fatal results: in 1935--two cases; for
the first nine months of 1936-two cases. (V-01. XLVI, p. 26.)
"b. From 1933 to October 1936 there were ten expiosions
of gas and coal dust, as a result of which twenty-one persons
received burns to face and hands and one person died. (Vol.
XLVI, pp. 139-141.}
"c. The existence of gas-filled mines tended to disorganize the work and to diminish the fulfilment of the plan of
coal output.

"3. Was it possible to improve the ventilation?
"It was possible to improve the ventilation. As will be
seen from No. 1, Point B of the present findings, such elementary .measures as the sinking of ventilation shafts, the even
distribution af the air ,supplied by the main fans, the rational placing of the portable fans and normal care of the
underground ventilation installations, might have greatly imprQved the ventilation of the mines in the Prokopyevsk Colliery.
"The fact that the measures indicated were not adopted
can only be due to malicious intent.

"C.

Capital Construction and Reconstruction !Work of the
Kuzbas Coal Trust in 1932-36

"l. Did the plans of construction work carried out correspond to the interests of the development 'Of the coalfield'!
"a. The principal purpose of the Kuzbas is to supply the
coke and chemical industry of the East with coal of a special
kind. The ·development of the coalfield demands the construction of a number of pits to work the coal of the required
kind, so that these pits may ensure the development of the
coalfield projected for the near future.
"The 'Kapitalnaya No. 1' Mine of the Kiselyov District, on
which over 7,000,000 rubles were spent, and which possesses rich seams of coal of mark 'K,' was put into conservation in 1935. The 100-metre level of the Stalin Mine in
the Prokopyevsk Colliery, w,hich possesses rich seams of coal
of mark 'K,' was put into con~ervation in 1934. The reason
453

given for the conservations was lack of funds. (Vol. XLVIII,
pp. 326 and 331.)
.
·
.
"At the s;ime time work involving an expenditure of
6,315,000 rubles was undertaken on the construction of four
inclined pils in Kiselyov, \vhich pits contained only 30 per
cent coal of lhis mark 'K.' (Vol. XLIV, p. 132.)
"The diversion of funds from the construction of secondary pits to the construction of pits of prime importance,
within the limits of the appropriations made for the Kuzbas
Coal Trust, would have made ft possible to put into operation
in good time a sufficient number of pits with seams of coal
of mark 'K.'
"2. What were the consequences of the incorrect planning
of construction work?
"a. Six mines w.ith an aggregate estimated capacity of
12,500,000 tons of coal per annum have been put into conservation. 15,657,000 rubles have been expended on these
pits, {Vol. XLIV, p. 134.)
"b. A number of the collieries of the Kuzbas, such as the
Kiselyov, Osinovka, the Kuibyshev and Lenin Collieries, and
partly also the Prokopyevsk Colliery, have been transformed
into collieries of small pits, which do not ensure the fulfilment of the plan of these c.ollieries, and therefore of the Kuzbas as a whole, even for the immediate futu.re. (Vol. XLIV, p.
132.)
"c. The principal source of coal of mark 'K'-the Prokopyevsk Colliery-is in a very serious state, since the temporary
filling-in equipment and the designs for this equipment have
not been completed, and the colliery is not equipped and not
prepared for working the secondary (lower) levels on the
filling-in system.
·
·
"d. The available pits producing coal of mark 'K'-are not·
sufficient to ensure the output of coal of this quality which
will be required in the next few years."

The President: Comrade Vyshinsky, have you any questions?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: Have the accused any questions?
Sliestou: I have no questions; the experts' findings are correct.
The President: You are not an expert on this question. Does
Stroilov have any comments to make?
· Sll'oilou: I have.
/'
The President: Please make them.
454

Stroilov: Mv first comment refers to the use of the chamberand-pillar systC'm of equipment. I take full responsibility for using
this system without adopting the necessary rationalization and
technical measures. But it was not the wreckers' organization
which initiated this system. Our wrecking consisted in maintaining
this system, which gives very considerable effects temporarily
and so aroused no suspicion when used on a wide scale.
~Iy second comment refers to ventilation. Speaking of ProkopyeYSk, the state of ventilation was the principal and almost the
main consequence of using this system of natural subsidence, as a
result of which it was impossible to concentrate the fans either on
blowing or on suction, and we had to have deconcentrated airing.
The second cause is the adoption of mechanized extraction almost
exclusively by means of shot firing, and not with the aid of coalcutters or pneumatic picks. But as the use of explosives gave a
better economic effect than the coal-cutters, it made a very good
impression on -technical public opinion. The impression was create<l that everything was as it should be, and the necessary
measures were not introduced in the schedules of work. Add to
this the wilful and malicious intent which existed, the results, of
course, are as reported by expert Lekus. But I would ask the Court
to note the following: I confirm the correctness of the report on
these two questions, the full correctness of the findings of the experts in regard to future resuHs if the necessary measures are not
taken. But the technical reasons are somewhat different.
In 1935 I took measures to start a fully mechanized pneumatic
gallery in !Koksovaya Pit and this was done under my personal·
direction with Soviet equipment and the fully :mechanized gallery
was started.
I would ask the Court to take this into account. That is one
point. Beginning with 1935 and in 1936 measures were taken
for the artificial subsidence of the chambers with more intensive
flooding. The number of fires in 1935-36 was smaller. Thus,
certain measures to reduce them were taken, but, o.f course,
they were inadequate compared with the results of our wrecking
work.
\Vith regard to planning I fully agree with the experts' findings to the effect that the situation in regard to coking coal is serious. However, in 1935 enormous prc:Jb"TCSS was shown in the
development of coking coal and a five-year plan has been drawn
up to 1942.
I would ask the Court also to take this into account. Above
all. a question was also raised as to what limits the development
of coal. It is due to the fact that the power stations are undey ,the
Power Administration.
·

And lastly about designing. Here much more wrecking was
done than is enumerated in the findings of expert Lekus. Again
I ask the Court to take into consideration thatin 1935 the general
estimates were completely revised, the designing was standardized
according to type and eleven pits were started in a much better
condition than in previous years. The work was given "good"
marks ·and even higher. Of course, had our wreaking work in
designing new plants ceased, the two per cent increase in cost
would not, of course, have taken place, and the technical organization and readiness of the ipits would have been much better.
On the whole, I think tllat the remarks and the findings of the
experts reported by Lekus .are correct. I know nearly ail the
me~ers of that committee of experts.
Vyshinsky: I would ask that the accused be informed that if
they have any amendments or supplementary questions concerning the experts' report, they may make them. If there are no.
such questions ·we may consider the matter closed.
The President: Accused Stroilov has been given permission to
speak. He has no questions to put, but wishes ito make a comprehensive statement.
Stroilov: I have not commented on the experts' report, I have
given my conclusions to the Court.
The President: That means there are no mare comments?
Vyshinsky: I have none.
The President: We will now take the third experts' report.
Comrade Pokrovsky.
Pokrovsky (reads}: ·

"Answers of Pokrovsky, Chairman of the Commission of Experts, to the questions submitted by the State Prosecutor,
Comrade Vyshinsky, Procurator of the U.S.S.R., and
endorsed by the Court, in coilllection with the criminal
activities of the accused Norkin and Drobnis at the Kemerovo Combined Works Construction.
"The present findiings are based on the materials of a
commission of experts whlch worked af various eonstruction
units of the Kemerovo Combined. ·works Construction from
October 29 to November 14, 1936, consisting of:
"1. Belgorodsky, t~hnological engineer;
"2. Pakuro, construction engineer;
"3. Ivanov, construction engineer;
"4. Kotlyar, technological engineer;
"5. Shutikov, technological engineer;
"6. Gerasimov, finance expert;
456

"7. Vezenifsyn, technological engineer;
"8. Bondar, technological engineer;
"9. Uvarova, technological engineer;
"10. Smirnov, construction engineer;
"11. Trofimenko, technological iengineer;
"12. Orzherovsky, electrical engineer;
"13. Voitsekhovsky, technological engineer;
"14. Pokrovsky, technological engineer, Chairman of the
Commission of Experts."
The committee was split up among the numerous works of the
Kemerovo Works Construction and its auxiliary enterprises; investigations were made on the spot and photographs of various objects were taken. In addition a quantity of material was documented,
which material I will submit to the Court, and on the basis of
which the findings on the questions submitted to me were drawn
up. But before proceeding to reply to the questions, I would ask
Comrade President to permit me to answer a number of questions
in camera because of their secret nature.
The President: Answer the questions which are not secretPokrovsky: The first group of important questions (reads):

"A. Explosions at the Kemerovo District Electric Power Stati<m on February 3 and 9, 1936.
"l. What were the causes of the explosions at the Kemerovo District Electric Power Station'!
"Reply:
"The furnaces of the boilers of the Kemerovo District
Electric Power Station are designed for pulverized fuel. The
milling installation of the power station is designed to pulverize coal with a volatile content not exceeding 25 per cent.
"Gas coal {from the Lenin Colliery}, which has a volatilecontent of 42 per cent, when pulverized and dried at a tempernituve of 120°-140° C gives off large quantities of volatile
substances with a low ignition point.
"The whole pulverizing system becomes filled with a
large quantity of infl~mmable gases mixed with air. A
small spark is sufficient to produce an explosion which might
lead to the destructi:ion of the boilers, loss of life and protracted interruption of the electricity supply.
"Sparks may be easily fonned when the pulverizing is.
done by a ball-mill. Moreover, the dust of such coals as the
gas coal of the Lenin Colliery may spontane01/l.Sly ignite at a
comparatively low temperature-140° C.
457

"Hence the cause of the explosions at the Kemerovo District Electric Power Station on F·cbruary 3 and 9, 1936, was
the ignition of coal with a volatile content of 30.1 per cent.
(See records 1106, Vol. III, pp. 377-388.)
"2. Could the explosion have been averted?
"Reply:
'
"Yes, it could. All that was required at the Kemerovo
District Electric Power Station was not to use as fuel coal
· with a volatile content exceeding the standard 25 per cent for
which the pulverizing system Qf the power station is designed.
"3. Was the explosion due to accident or to malicious intent?
"Reply:
,
"The explosion cannot be regarded as accidental. The
Commission of Experts are in possession of documents which
show that the manager of the Kemerovo Combined Works
Construction was repeatedly warned of the danger of explosion, in particular by Skripkin, Director of the Kemerovo District Electric Power Station, by Ponomaryov, suP'erintendent
of the boiler department, and by the state technical inspectors
(see the documents in Vol. LV, pp. 369, 370, 371, 372, 374, 37fi
and 378). In spite of these warnings by technical men, Norkin,
manager of ·the Kemerovo Combined \Vorks Construction,
gave written instructions to continue burning coal with a hi.gh
volatile content.
"In view of the above, the Commission of Experts find
that the explosion at the power station was due to malicious
!intent. All the documents referred to will be found in the
file of the preliminary investigation. (See Vol. LV, pp. 369,
370, 371, 373, 374, 375 and 378.)

"B. Accidents at the Nitrogen Works Construction on
March 22 and April 5, 1936
"l. ·what were the causes of the accidents?
"Reply:
"On l\farch 22, 1936, at the moment when the concrete
work on the ceiiing was heing finished, the whole ceiling collapsed. The collapse was due lo the fact that the scaffolding
supporting the concrete framework of the roof was not e:>timated: the timber from which the scaffolding was made was
unfit for use. (Vol. LV, p. 354.)
"On April 5, 1936, the scaffolding of the air blower collapsed owing to the fact that the scaffolding was built of old
458

timber unfit for use, and without estimation and technical
instructions. (See Vol. LV, p. 357.}
"2. Could these accidents have been averted?
"Reply:
"If preliminary calculations of the scaffolding had been
made, if new material 'had been utilized, and if there had been
technical supervision of the building of the scaffolding, there
would have :been every possibility of averting these accidents.
"3. ·what were the consequences of these accidents?
''Reply:
"These accidents resulted in matierial loss, delay in the
construction of a department, and injury to six workers (in
the accident on the air blower).
"4. Were the accidents due to chance or to malicious intent?
"Reply:
_
"Having examined the character of both accidents and on
the basis of the following considerations, namely 1) that the
use of unsuitable and rotten material as scaffolding, when
this scaffolding had to be used by workers, was impermissible
both from the technical and managerial standpoint, and
2) that the lessons were not drawn from the first accident and
fourteen days 13.ter a second accident occurred from the same
cause, the Commission of Experts considers that these accidents cannot be regarded as being due to chance, but are the
result of malicious intent."
I request that the answers to the remaining questions be heard
in camera.
The President: Comrade Vyshinsky, have you any questions
or comments?
Vyshinsky: No.
The President: Accused DrO'bnis, have you any questions?
Dtobnis: No.
The President (to Drobnis): No comments?
Drobnis: No.
The President. A<:cused Norkin, have you any questions or
comments?
n·orkin: I have no particular questions, only technical amendments which are not very important.
The President: Has Comrade Vyshinsky any supplementary
questions to put fo the accused?
l'yshinsky: Concerning the conclusion of the Court investiga459

tion? I would ask that the investigation be not concluded today. At
present I have no more questions.
The President: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
Counsel for Defence: (Reply in the negative.)
The President: The session will-now proceed on the basis ·of
Article 19 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in crimera.
I must inform all present that the next ()pen session of the
Court will take place tomorrow at 4 p.m. Comrade Vyshinsky,
Procurator of the U.S.S.R., will begin his speech.
Adjournment for 20 minutes.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court ot the U.S.S.R.

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

*

*

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

*

On the evening of January 27, at the close of the public session, a session of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court was
held in camera.
At this session the experts, ·comrades Lekus and Pokrovsky,
presented to the Court their findings on the questions confirmed by
the Court, which were not subject to discussion in open Court.
Further, the witness Stein gave evidence on his connections
with the official representatives of a foreign state.
The aooused Pyatakov, Soko11nikov and Radek were examined
as to their conne-ctions with official representatives of foreign
states and the negotiations with representatives ·of these states
which they conducted in conformity with Trotsky's line to expedite war agairn,t the U.S.S.R. and to help foreign states to inflict defeat upon lhe V.S.S,R. and dismember its territory. The
examination of the accused Radek and Sokolnikov, and also the
documents appertaining to the matter submitted to them, established
the identity and official positions of the representatives of the
foreign states with whom Radek and Sokolnikov had conducted
negotiations.
The examination of Rataichak, Knyazev, Turok, Hrasche,
Shestov and Stroilov established their definite connections with the
agents of foreign ·intelligence services in the espionage and undermining activities in which they engaged in the U.S.S.R. _on the
instructions of these intelligence services as well as on the instruc460

tions of the anti-Soviet, Trotskyite centre-in pursuance of TrotskY·s line.
~ The examination of the accused and the submission and reading of the documents appertaining to this matter established the
names and official positions of Mr. K--, Mr. H - - and other
persons mentioned in the indictment and also referred to during
the court investigation without their names being divulged.
At the same in camera session the accused Pyatakov and Rataichak were interrogated on their criminal, wrecking activities in
the defence industry.

461

EVENING SESSION, JANUARY 28, 1937, 4.00 P.M.

Commandant: The Court is coming. Please rise.
The President: The session is resumed. Comrade Vyshinsky.
Procurator of the U.S.S.R., will speak· for the Prosecution.
Vyshinsky: Comrade Judges and members of the Supreme
Court of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. In proceeding to
perform my last duty in the present case I cannot but deal with
several highly important specific features of the present trial.
Jn my opinion these specific features are, first of all, that the
present trial, in a certain sense, sums up the criminal activities of
the Trotskyite conspirators who for many years have systematically, and with the assistance of the most repulsive and despicable
weapons, fought against the Soviet syst·em, against the Soviet state,
against the Soviet powe; and against our Party. This trial sums
up the struggle waged against the Soviet state and the Party by
these people, who started it long before the present time, started
it ·during the life of oiir great teacher and organizer od' the Soviet
state, Lenin. "While Lenin was alive these people fought against
Lenin; and after 'his death they fought aga<inst ·his great disciple,
that loyal guardian of Lenin's behests and the continuator of his
cause-Stalin.
Another specific feature of this trial is that it, like a searchlight,
illuminates the most remote recesses, the secret by-ways, the disgusting hidden corners of the Trotskyite underground.
This trial has revealed and proved the stupid obstinacy, the
reptile cold-bloodedness, the cool calculation of professional criminals with which the Trotskyite bandits have been waging their
struggle against the U . S.S.R. They stuck at nothing-neither
wrecking, nor diversions, nor espionage, nor terrorism, nor treason
lo their country.
\Vhen several months ago, in this very hall, in this very dock,
the members of the so.called united Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist centre were sitting; when the Supreme Court, represented by
the Military Collegium, was trying those criminals, all of us listened
to the story of their crimes that unfolded itself like a nightmare
scene before us, with horror and revulsion.
462

Every honest man in our counlry, every honest man in every
countrv in lhe world could not then but say:
This is the abyss of degradation!
This is the limit, the last boundary of moral and political>
decay!
This is· the diabolical infinitude of crime!
Every honest son of our country thought to himself: such hideous crimes cannot be repeated. There cannot be in our country
any more people who have fallen so low and who have so despicably betrayed us.
But now we are aigadn overcome with the sentiments that wefelt not long ago! Once again across our anxious and wrathful.
Yision pass frightful scenes of monstrous crime, of monstrous
treachery, of monstrous treason.
This trial, at which the accused themselves have confessed their
guilt; this trial, at which side by side with the .leaders of the so. called parallel Trotskyite centre-the accused Pyatakov, Sokolnikov, Radek and Serebryakov, sit in the same d.ock prominent
Trotskyites like Muralov, Drolbrnis, Boguslavsky and Livsh.itz;
·where side by side with these Trotskyites isit mere spies and secret
service agents like Rataichak, Shestov, Stroilov and Hrasche-this
trial has shown to what depths these people have sunk, in
what an abyss counter-revolutionary Trotskyism, which long agobeC.ame transformed into the advan<?-ed and most vicious unit of
international fascism, has become completely submerged.
This trial has revealed all the secret springs of the urnderground criminal activities of the Trotskyites, the whole mechanism
of their bloody, treacherous tactics. It has once again revealed the
• face of real, genuine Trotskyism-this old enemy of the workers and.
peasants, this old enemy of socialism, loyal servant of capitalism.
This trial has shown once again whom Trotsky and his henchmen are serving, what Trotskyism really represents in practice.
Here, in this 'hall, before tlhiis Court, before the whole country,
before the whole world, has passed a whole string of crimes committed. by these people.
\Yb.om did their crimes benefit? For what purpose, for the
sake of what ideas, and finally, for the sake of what political
platform or program, did th~se people commit their deeds? For
the sake of what? And finally, why did they become traitors to.
their country, betrayers of the cause of soeiaUsrn and oif the international proletariat?
I think this trial has exhaustively answered .all these questions,
has clearly and precisely revealed what brought them to this.
Like· a reYersed cinema reel, this trial ha:s reminded and shown.
us all the main stages of the historical path traversed by fue
463

Trolskyites and Trolskyism, which spent the more than thirty
years of its existence on preparing for its final conversion into a
storm detachment of fa~cism, into one of the departments of the
fascist police.
The accused themselves have told us whom they served. But
this was told us still more eloquently by their deeds, by their
sordid, sanguinary criminal deeds.
Many years ago our Party, the workinig class, our whole people,
rejected the Trotskyite-Zinovievite plat.form ais an anti-Soviet, antisocialist platform. Our people banished Trotsky from our country; his aocomp~kes were expelled fir-om tfhe ranks of the P;:irty as
traitors to the cause of the working class and socialism. Trotsky
and Z:i.noviev were routed, but .they did not subsitle; they did not
lay down their a·1ms.
'Dhe Trotskyites went 1.lillde11ground, they donned the mask of
repentance and pretended that they had disanned. Chl:>eyin:g the
instructions of Trotsky, Pyataikov and tlhe other leaders of llhis
gang of criminals, pursuing a policy of duplicity, camouflaging
flhemseh·es, they again penetrated into the Party, again penetrated
into Soviet offices, here and there they even managed to creep
into responsible positions of state, conceailing for a time, as has
now been established beyond a shadow of doubt, their old Trotskyite, anti-Soviet wares in their secret aparhnents, together with
arms, codes, passwords, connections and cadres.
Beginning with the formation of an anti-Party faction, passing
to sharper and sharper methods of struggle against the Party, be~oming, after their expulsion from the Party, the principal mouthpiece of all anti-Soviet groups and trends, they became trans.formed into the vanguard of the fascists operating on the direct instructions of foreign intelligence services.
The connections the Trotskyites had estahliShed with the G<!·
stapo and the fascists were exposed by the trial of the TrotskyiteZinovievite centre la-st year. The present trial has gone even further
in this respect. It has provided exceptionally convincing material
whicih has once again confirmed the existence o.f these connections and has brought it out more <lefinitely; i:t has fully confirmed and definitely brought out, by due process of law and in
its fullest scope, the treacherous role of Trotskyism, ·which has
utterly and rmreservedly passed into the camp of the enemy, which
has become transformed into one of the departm~nts of tihe "SS"
and the Gestapo.
The Troskyites, Trotskyism, have reached their destination.
Throughout the whole of their deplorable and shameful history the
Trots'kyite.s tried to str.ike and did strike at the most sensitive
464

and dangerous places of the proletarian revolution and of Soviet
socialist construction.
The directive received from Trotsky, which Pyatakov spoke
ahout here: "To strike the most palpafu'1e blows at the most sensitive spots," this directive represents the old Trotskyite attitude towards the Soviet government, towards socialist construction in
our country.
The Trotskyites were particularly active, revealed particular
determination, persistence and perseverance in their fight against
the Soviet government in the period which coineided with tl1e final
victory of socialism in the U.S.S.R. This is quite natural. To achieve
this victory we had to overcome enormous difficulties. These difficulties, particularly those we encountered on our path in the period
of 1929-31, especially in the rural dilstricts, encouraged the Trotskyite-Zinovievite underworld which began to stir, to put out their
feelers and, on Trotsky's instructions, ·tried to strike at the most
sensitive place.
Sensing their inevitable do9ffi, the remnants of the exploiting
classes wh1ch were destroyed by the proletarian dfotatorship, and
their agents, adopted new tactics, new forms, a new line of struggle against the Soviet power, which the accused have explained
and talked about .fully enough in this Court.
The intensified resistance of the classes hostile tp the proletarian dictatorship encouraged the Trotskyite-Zinovievite gang;
moreover, it was inspired and instigated fo commit crimes against
the U.S.S.R. by the capitalist system which still exists and encircles
the U.S.S.R.
.
Calculating on weakening the Soviet rear international counterrevolution has.fened its preparations for intervention. It is well
known that the interventionists prepare to strike their blow against
the Soviet Union every year. The fragments of the counter-revolutionary Trotskyite-Zinovievite group knew that side by side with
them were operating other champions or"the restoration of capitalism, other detachments of capitalist agents in our country: the
"Industrial Party," Kondratyev's "Toiling Peasants' Party," a kulak party, the "Union Bureau of the Mensheviks," the activities of
which were examined by the Supreme Court-all these organizations exposed as organizations of wreckers and groups of diversionists who welcomed Trotskfs struggle against our Party, against the
Soviet government, knowing that in the Trotskyites they really had
champions. of the overthrow of the dictatorship of the proletariat
like themselves, only more cynical and more insolent.
· What does the restoration of capitalism in our country ·mean?
In 1932 ~he Trotskyites increased their consolidation with the
co~nter-r~volutionary anti-Soviet groups, they established connec465

tions with the Hight opposition for the purpose of waging a joint
struggle against the Party, against the Soviet government. The real
nature of these connections was exposed by Comrade Stalin at the
Sixteenth and Seventeenth ~ongresses of our Party; he showed
that the counter-revolutionary Trotskyites and Zinovievites and
·'the undisguised defeatists," as he expressed it, are united by the
striving to restore capitalism -in the U.S.S.R. Comrade Stalin then
described this program as the program of contemptible cowards
and defeatists, a counter-revolutionary program of the restoration
of capitalism in the U.S.S.R.
In· the light of the events of today it has become particularly
clear what ·an enormous historical service Comrade Stalin performed when in 1931 he revealed the real nature of the TrotskyiteZinovievite counter-revolutionary organization in its "new" quality.
In his letter to the Proletarskaya Revolutsia Comrade Stalin
wrote: "As a matter of fact, Trotskyism is the vanguard of tlb.e
counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie which is fighting against Communism, against the Soviet government, against the building of
S-Ocialism in the U.S.S.R." Comrade Stalin brand'ed Trotskyism
as the vanguard of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, which
received precisely from the hands of the Trotskyites spiritual, tactical and organizational weapons for their fi'ght against Bolshevism, against the building of socialism.
In the light of the present-trial the exceptional historical significance of this statement becomes particularly clear. In the light
of the present trial the role of the underground, anti-Soviet Trotskyite. groups, of this principal channel of anti-S.oviet sentiments,
hopes and aspirations of every description, the principal lever, the
battering ram with which the enemies of the Soviets are trying
to cause a breach in the ramparts of our state, to demolish the
fortress of socialism which we have built up, comes out in particular relief.
·
. It is not an accident that the Trotskyites are playing this role
of vanguard of the anli-Soviet fascist forces. The descent of Trotskyism into the anti-Soviet underworld, its conversion into a
fascist agency, jg merely the culmination of its historical development.
The conversion of the Trotskyite groups into groups of diversionists and murderers operating on the instructions of foreign
secret services and of General Staffs of aggressors merely crowns.
the struggle Trotskyism has been waging against the working
Class and the Party, against Lenin and Leninism, for decades.
Trotskyism started out on its path with this disgusting struggle, on
this path Trotskyism stands now, and along this path it is moving
further and further, knowing no bounds to its hatred and rage.
466

The whole history of the political activities of the Trolskyites
represents an uninterrupted chain of betrayals of the cause of the
working c:;,lass, of the cause of socialism.
As we know, in 1904 Trotsky came out with a most despicable
pamphlet entitled Our Political Tasks. This pamphlet was packed
full of filthy insinuations against our great teacher, the leader of
the international proletariat, Lenin, against the great Leninist
teaching regarding the paths of the Bolshevik victory, the victory
of the· toilers, the victory of socialism. In this pamphlet Trotsky
squirts venomous saliva at the great ideas of Marxism-Leninism.·
\Yith it he tried to poison the proletariat, tried to turn the proletariat from the path of irreconcilable class struggle, slandered the
proletariat, slandered the proletarian revolution, slandered Bolshevism, slandered Lenin by calling him "Maximilian," after
Robespierre, the hero of the French bourgeois revolution, and
thereby tried to humiliate the great leader of the international proletariat.
Knowing no limits to his insolence and political shamelessness,
this gentleman permitted himself to call Lenin the leader of the
reactionary wing of the working class movement. \Vhile Lenin and
Stalin were choosing the best people, training them in political
battles against the autocracy, against tsarism, against the bourgeoisie, cementing them into the core of the Bolshevik Party, JudasTrotsky knocked together a united front of the lackeys of capitalism for the purpose of fighting the cause of the proletariat. In
1911-12, Trotsky also organized a bloc as he later organized the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc; he organized the so-called "August
bloc" consisting of the lackeys of capital, ·of Mensheviks, of those
who had been expelled from the ranks of the Bolshevik Party, of
flabby intellectuals, and the refuse of the working class movement.
Concerning this bloc, Comrade Stalin wrote: "It is well known that
this patch-work 'party' pursued the aim of destroying· the Bolshevik Party."
Lenin wrote that this bloc was "built up on lack of principle,
on hypocrisy and empty phrases." Trotsky and his co-adjutors
retaliated with a stream of filthy slander; they hurled abuse at
Lenin and the Bolsheviks, and called them "barbarous," "fiercely
sectarian" Asiatics. Concerning Trotsky, Lenin wrote: "Such types
are characleristi:c as the wrecka:ge of yesterday's histodcal formations, or systems, of the time when the mass working class movement in Russia was still sleeping." Twenty years ago Lenin warned
the Party and the working class against such a "type," as he then
called Trot~ky. In his article "Violating Unity Vnder Cover of
Cries for Unity" Lenin wrote: "The young working class generation must know very weH with whdin it is dealing."
467

·This trial :will help millions and milfiom. 19f yom»g wor~en
·and peasants, the toilers of all countries, cle:;u7Jy and <llistinctly
tO realise with whom we are really dealing.· Of course, that contemptible Trotskyite bloc failed to destroy the Bolshevik Party,
but ever:1. after the collapse of the bloc the Trotskyites eontinued
to attack the Bolshevik Party in every way they <rnuld. 'Ilia whole
period of the history of our working_ class movement, from' 1903 to
the very eve of the revolution, is filled with the struggie· Tirotsky
and the Trotskyites waged against the growing r.evolutic:inar.y attitude of the masses in Russia, against Lenin, and' against his Party.
In 1915 Trotsky came mit in opposition to- Leninr& doctrine of
the possibility of the victory of socialism in one country. Thus, he
-completely capitulated to capitalism over twenty years ago!
In his fight against Lenin Trotsky in tmn- served.: &onomism;
Menshevism, Liqui-dationism,. Kautskyism, Sodal-Democracy and
national-chauvinism, just as he is now serving· impe:nialism and.
fascism in fl.le fight against the U.S.S.R.
Is it an ~ccident that the Trotskyites, as C<Jrora<le Slalin· pointed
uut some time ago, in the end became transformed into a· nest and
a hotbed ·of degeneration and' Thermidorism? Is it an accident
that Trotsky, wiho found himself in the rankS.'Of our Party after the
rr.evolufa:m, argain broke away and slipped im'o· the c0unter-revoiulfionairy position, was flung ont from our state, frCtID· our SOviet
1Union? Is it an accident that Trotskvism has beco:rme trnnsfermedi
~info a storm detachment of ~pitali~t ·rest©ration?
It is not an accid.ent, because Trotskyism graivitated tc>wards.
this from its very in{'.epticm. It js not am: acddeiltt beca~ eveni
before the Oetdber Revolution Trotsky and h" friends fought
acrainst Lenin and Lenin's Party_, just as they are now fighting:
against Stalin and the Party of Lenin and StaHn.
·
Comrade Stalir.'s forecast has fully come true. Trotskyism
has indeed become the central rallying point of all the forces.
hostile to socialism, the gang of mere bandits, spies and murderers
who placed themselves entirely at the disposal of foreign secret
services, became finally and irrevocably transformed into lackeys
of capitalism, into restorers_ of capitalism in our country.
And here, in this Court, it was precisely this despicable
essence of Trotskyism that became revealed with exceptional fullness and clarity. They reaohed this shameful end because they
had marched along this road for decades, singing fihe praises of
capitalism,· never believing . in the success of socialist construction, in the victory of socialism. That is why they finally adopted a
comprehensive -program of capitalist restoration; that is why they
went so fa.r as to betray and sell our co,un1ry.
Things were already moving towards this when Trotsky, as
468

was the case in 1922, proposed that our industrial enterprises, our
trusts, be permitted to mortgage our property, including our basic
capital, to private capitalists in order to oibtain credits, which the
Soviet state really needed at that time.
Already at that time this proposal of Trotsky's was a step
towards the return to the rule of the capitalists, towards once
again making the capitalists, the financiers and the manufacturers
the owners of our factories and mills, and towards robbing our
workers of the rights they had won under the Soviet ·power. These·
gentlemen asserted that Soviet economy "was coalescing more and
more with capitalist economy," that is to ;say, that it was becoming
transformed into an appendage of world capitalism. They said
that "we s'hall always be under the control of world economy,"that is to say, they asserted what the capitalist sharks were dreaming of.
Comrade Stalin at that time exposed this attitude of sabotage
adopted by Trotskyism, when he said: "Capitalist control,
that means first of all, financial control . . . financial control,
that means implanting in our country branches of the big capitalist banks, that means forming so~ed 'suhsidfary' banks. But
are there such banks in our country?" asked Comrade Stalin. "Of
course not! And not only are there no such banks, but there never
will be as long as the Soviet power exists."
Capilali.st control, which ilie Trotskyites and the heads of
the Trotskyite bloc now sitting here in this dock talked about,
-dreamed of and demanded, means the right of the capitalists to
dispose of our country, of our markets, as they please. Capitalist
control means, finally, as Comrade Stalin said, political control,
the destruction of the political independence of our country, adapting the laws of rhe country to the interests and tastes of international capitalist economy. This is the meanfog of the so-called
capitalist control for which Trotsky and a section of the leaders,
of the so-called anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre sitting here in the
dock longed for.
Exposing the anti-Soviet nature of such proposals, Comrade
Stalin said: "If they mean this real, capitalist control . . . then
J must say that there is no such control in our country, and
there never will be as long as our proletariat is alive, and as
long as the dictatorship of the proletariat exists in our c.ountry."
That ~s why it is not an accident that these two tasks: preparing
for capitalist restoration and fightillig the dictatorship of the proletariat, are bound so organically together.
Is it an accident that, having started with capitalist control_.
these people sank to a frank platform of capitalist restoration,
to open struggle for the purpose of carrying out this plat469

form in alliance with the capitalists against the dictatorship of the
proletariat?
\Ve know that at the turning points of our struggle, at the
.sharp upsurges of our proletarian revolution, the Trotskyite leaders were always, as a rule, found in the camp of our enemies, on
the other side of the barricades.
. The repudiation of the socialist character of our revolution,
the repudiation of the possibility of building socialism in our
country, determined and predetermined the hostile attitude of the
Trotskyites towards the cause of socialist construction in the
U.S.S.R.
This, however, <lid not prevent the Trotskyites from masking
<themselves with the name of socialism, any more than it has
prevented many enemies of socialism from masking themselves
with this name today.
This ha:s always happened in history. We know that the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, these most bitter enemies
of socialism, always masked themselves wi.th the name of s()cialism. But this did not prevent them from grovelling at the feet of
the capitalists, the landlords and the White generals. We remember how the Mensheviks in Petlura's "Rada" government invited the troops of Wilhelm II to the Ukraine, how they traded in
the liberty and honour of the Ukrainian people;
How under the signboard of .Tchaikovsky's .Sodalist-..Revoltt-.
tionary government, the interventioni5ts were operating in Archangel;
How the so-called "socialist" "government of the Committee of
the Constituent Assemblv" led to the rule of Kolchak;
- How the Menshevik ·government of Noah Jordania faithfully
served the foreign interventionists!
All these gt;ntlemen called themselves socialists, they all masked
themselves with the name of socialism; but we all know that
there have never been more consistent, more cruel and brutal
enemies of socialism than the Mensheviks and "Socialist-Revcrlutiona ries."
Trotsky and the Trotskyites have for_ a long time been a capitalist agency in the working class movement. They have now
become transformed into a fascist vanguard, into the storm battalion of fascism.
·
In 1926-27 they took the path of open anti-Soviet crime, that is,
of actions liable already to criminal prosecution. They carried
their struggle against the leadership of our Party, against the
Soviet government,_ into the streets or at lea~t tried to. That was
1,} difficult a·nd complicated period in the life of the Soviet state.
It was the period of transition from the restoration to the i:econ470

struction of our industry and agriculture on the basis of high technique. That period could not but give rise to serious difficulties,
which reflected the complexity of the struggle between the capitali"t and socialist elements in ou-r economy.
The "Opposition Bloc," the so-called ".New Opposition" headed
by Trotsky, Zinoviev and Kamenev, and assisted by nearly all the
accused sitting in the dock here-Pyatakov, Radek, Serebryakov,
Sokolnikov, Muralov, Drobnis, Boguslavsky-at that time tried to
take advantage of these difficulties to make another attempt to
stab the Sovietstate in the back, and as violently as possible.
The Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc of 1926 was a bloc which
turned the edge of its struggle against the cause of socialism
in our country and for capitalism. Under cover of false and sometimes outwardly seeming "Left" phrases about "super-industrialization," and so forth, the Trotskyite-Zinovievite gang in 1926-27
put fonvard proposals which, if adopted, would have undermined
and broken the alliance between the workers and peasants, would
have undermined the foundation of ·the Soviet state. They put
forward such proposals as increasing the pressure on the peasantry. as ensuring "primitive socialist accumulation" by ruining
and robbing the peasantry; they advanced a number of demands
which if conceded would have broken the bond between town and
country and thereby would have made real industrialization
utterly impossible. Strictly speaking, these proposals and demands
were on a line with the present acts of diversion and wrecking.
Strictly speaking, there is only a difference in form between the
'\\Tecking and diversive acts of 1926-27 and those of the present
'time. Already at that time the Opposition Bloc tried to break the
hond between the working class and the peasantry by means of
their pseudo-"Left," but in reality counter-revolutionary proposals,
in a manner which corresponded to the conditions of the class
struggle prevailing at that time. That, too, was a special form of
diversion, a form of destructive acts directed against· the dictatorship of the proletariat and the cause of socialist construction. These proposals advanced by the then Opposition were
merely a special form of the struggle against the Soviet state corresponding to the historical situation at that time. Ten years have
elapsed and we see that they have taken to the path of direct
diversion, the path of wrecking, the path of destructive work, but
in much sharper ·forms, corresponding to the new conditions, to
the conditions of the fierce class struggle against the remnants of
the capitalist elements.
It is not an accident that the "New Opposition," as that bloc
called itself, united a "super-industrializer," such as Trotsky was,
471

with an opponent of industrialization, such as Sokolnikov was ten
years ago and has rernaiped to this day. _By the very nature of
things, the "New Opposition" stood for a definite political and social~economic program, which, if carried out, would inevitably
have led to the liquidation of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
and this, in turn, would inevitably have led to the restoration of
capitalism in the U.S.S.R.
Comrade Judges, when today we hear in Court, in the testimony of the ringleaders of this gang, of the ringleaders of the
Trotskyite underground organization, when we hear confessions
that they really did receive from Trotsky directives for the restoration of capitalism in the U.S.S.R., that they accepted this line, and
that, in carrying it out, they conducted wreck~ng, diversive and
espionage work, a question m-ay arise which, indeed, some people
have actually raised, namely: How can these people who fought
for socialism for so many years, people who blasphemously called
themselves Bolshevik Leninists, be accused of these monstrous
crimes? Does it not prove that the accusation is unfounded, that
these people are being accused of crimes they cannot possibly be
accused of because of the very nature of their past socialist, revolutionary, Bolshevik activities?
I will reply to this question. The -accused in the present case are
charged with having attempted by _the most repulsive and dishonest methods to re-impose upon our country the yoke of capitalism.
We accuse these gentlemen of having betrayed socialism. And
we support this charge not only with evidence of what they committed today-that is the subject of the indictment-but we say
that the history of their fall began 1011g before they organized
the so-called "parallel" centre, this offshoot of the criminal Trotskyite-Zinovievite united bloc. Organic connection is proved.
Historical connection is proved. And what I have said would be
sufficient to remove all doubt that the principal charge made
by the State Procurator against the accused sitting in the dock
of attempting to restore in ~ur country the capitalist system which
was overthrown 19 years ago is fully proved, proved documentarily. This accusation condemns the criminals in this ·dock to eternal
disgrace and ·to the eternal execration of all honest toilers, of al!
the honest people in our country, and throughout the world.
From the platform of 1926, from anti-Soviet street demon~
strations, from illegal printing plants, from alliance .with Whitegi.tard officers to which they too resorted at that time, to diver·SiOn, espionage, terrorism and. treason in 1932-_36, there is only
one step. And this step they took!
We have already seen this in the case of the Trotskyite-Zinoviev472

ite united bloc, in the case of the political fate of Zinoviev, Kamenev, Smirnov, Mrachkovsky, Ter-Vaganyan and the others who
ended their lives in disgrace, branded as mercenaries of foreign
intelligence services.
.
And now we see it in the fate of the accused in the present
case, the majority of whom for many years before and after the
October Revolution fought against Lenin and Leninism, against
the Party of Lenin and Stalin, ag~inst the building of socialism
in our country.
Pyatakov, K. Radek, Sokolnikov, Serebryakov, Drobnis, Muralov, Livshitz, Boguslavsky, Shestov-'-have all, for a number of
years, fought against the cause of socialism, against the cause of
Lenin and Stalin.
Already at that time these gentlemen directed their efforts
towards, as Stalin put it, "breaking the Party's back," and at the
same time brealcing the back of the Soviet government, the inevitable doom of which all the counter-revolutionary ravens used t<>
croak about.
In this fight against the Soviet power these gentlemen sank
lower, I think, than anyone has sunk before.
Lenin foresaw the inevitability of the shameful end which the
accused have reached, and which everyone who takes the path
they trod must reach. The resolution adopted on Lenin's proposal
by the Tenth Congress of our Patty (which then still called itself the Russian Communist Party), uttered the stern wamingthat those who persist in factionalism and in errors under the
Soviet system must inevitably slip into the camp of the enemies of
the working class, into the camp of the Whiteguards and imperialists. These gentlemen, by all their activities, have proved the·
justness of this historical forecast.
What is the political past of the members of the centre? Pyatakov, Radek, Serebryakov, Sokolnikov, Rogusla;·sky, Dro:imis, ~for­
alov and Shestov for many years nursed a hatred for Hie Soviet system, for socialism. They knew how to camouflage, they knew how·
.to conceal their real sentiments and views, they resorted to d!Uplicity
and deceit, as they have now confessed. Some of them say that at
certain times they had retired from Trotskyism. This is hard to believe. \Ve know that all the activities of the accused in this case·
were highly consistent. Such workers of merit for Trotskyism, I
would call them, as Pyatakov, Radek, Drobnis, Serebryakov and"
Boguslavsky camouflaged themselves, resorted to blackmail,
.cheated their own people and others. Only in a milieu such as that
created by the Pyatakovs and Radeks-these most unprincipled
and utterly degraded people who used their highly responsible
4'73

posts in the Soviet state system for the purpose of perpetrating
their shameful, sordid and bloody crimes-only in such a milieu
<:ouid a Trotskyite actif, so to speak, consist of adventurers and
scoundrels like the Rataichaks, Knyazevs, Shestovs, Arnolds, Stroilovs and Hrasches.
· ·
You, Comrade Judges, have seen these gentlemen, you have
heard them, you have studied them. Take Rataichak. Whether
he is a German or ·a Polish spy is not clear, but that he is a spy
there cannot be any doubt; and as is appropriate to his profession, a liar, a swindler and a rascal. A man who, on his own confession, has an old autobiography and a new autobiography. A
man who, according to circumstances, forges and re-shuffles these
autobiographies. A man who, while vice-chairman of the Provindal
Council of National Economy in Volhynia, not only connives at the
rnbbery, theft and profiteering of his subordinate, but actually
takes part in these downright, sordid crimes. On his own confession he was kept by this thief, embezzler and speculator. And
this Rataichak, with all his remarkable qualities as revealed
by the preliminary investigation aµd in this court, becomes Pyatakov's closest assistant in the chemical industry. A remarkable
chemis't!
Pyatakov kne\v whom he chose. One might say: a good hunter
-easily finds his game. Rataichak climbs into high posts. He says
nothing about the motives which prompt him, and he is not as
talkative as Arnold, who confessed that he was tortured "by a
des-ire to get into high society." Rataichak is reticent. Of course,
he is more cunning than Arnold. He knows that speech is silver
and silence is golden. And so this Rataichak, with all his moral
'<Iualities, turns out to be a man capable of rising to distinction.
He is Chief of the Central Administration of the Chemical
Industry. One must ponder over the meaning of the words:
Chief of the Central Administration of the Chemical Industry of
-our countTy.
Even if Pyatakov had committed no other crimes, the mere
fact that he allowed this man to come within a kilometre of the
-chemical industry would be sufficient to earn him the severest
punishment.
In the responsible post of Chief of the Central Administration of
the Chemical Indus:fry, Rataichak, this super-wrecker, develops his
criminal talents, starts out on a long voyage of crime, unfurls
his sails to the full, causes explosions, destroys the fruits of the
labour of the people, kills people.
· · Or take Drobnis, an old professional Trotskyite, this exterminator of 1v'orkers in accordance with the formula "the more victims the better." Or take Knyazev, the Japanese spy who has

474

wrecked dozens of trains. Or Livshitz, ex-Assistant People's Commi~sar of Railways, and simultaneously Pyatakov's assistant in
criminal affairs on the railways. The system of concurrent jobs
was extensively practiced by this company . . . . Finally, take the
Trotskyite "soldier" Muralov, one of Trotsky's most loyal and
steadfast aides-he, too,· confessed that he was a wrecker and
<liwrsionist. And beside him is Arnold, alias Ivanov, alias Vasilyev,
alias Rask, alias Kulpenen, and how many more names he had
nobody knows. This hardened scoundrel, who had gone through
fire and water, a rascal ii.nd an adventurer, also turns out to be
a trusted Trotskyite agent-and a first class bandit. Or take
Hrasche, a man not only of three dimensions, but at least of three
citizenships, who himself described his principal occupation by
the eloquent, but not very pleasant word, spy; and he added that
as a spy, he was not supposed to-have any opinions.
This, then, is a running characterization of the cadres who
haYe filed past the Court, past the whole country, past the whole
world-cadres who were gathered together by the "parallel"
centre, the army which this "parallel" centre organized on the
instructions of Trotsky, which it trained and hurled into the Trotskyite struggle against the Soviet power and Soviet state.
Speaking of cadres, special reference must of course be made
to their ringleaders, their chieftains. We will start, of course, with
Pyatakov, who, after Trotsky, was the first chieftain of this
brigaud gang. Pyatakov did not stray into the company of the
Trotskyites accidentally. Pyatakov, who up to now has persistently
and skillfully camouflaged himself, has always been an old enemy
of Leninism, an old enemy of our Party and an enemy of the
Soviet power. Let us trace Pyatakov's political path .
.In 1915 he and Bukharin advanced an anti-Leninist platform
on the question of the right of nations to self-determination, a question which is of fundamental importance in determining the position of Bolshevism. Incidentally, he insultingly called Lenin a
"talmudist of self-determination."
In 1916 this person, under the nom de plume of P. Kievsky,
comes out as a mature i·deologist of Trotskyism. He argues that
1he social revolution (he said-the sooial process) can be conceived only as the combined adion of the pTOletaTians of all countries. which will destroy the frontiers of bourgeois states, will pull
up the frontier post.s. Outwardly this is ultra-"Left"; in reality it
is a purely Trotskyite presentation of the question. Here Pyatakov
repeats in full the Trotskvite thesis that it is impossible to build
socialism in one country. He opposes Lenin. Lenin exposes the antiMarxian charadt'er of this Pyatakov pronouncement. Lenin already
at that time describes this article by Pyatakov as one capable of
475

strikin_g "a very serious blow at our movement and at our Party,"
as an article which might compromise the Party from within, from
within its own ranks, and "convert it," as Lenin wrote, "into a
representative of caricature :Marxism."
The year 1917. Pyatakov again opposes Lenin's thesis o~ tlie
_ilg.ht of nations to self-determination. He calls this right an
"empty right" which diverts the revolutionary struggle to a false
path. He opposes the thesis on the possibility of building socialism in one country. In 1917 Pyatakov opposed Lenin's April
theses.
In 1918 he a.gain opposes Lenin. This was the stern year
of heroic struggle of the workers and peasants of our country;
the year in which they waged an armed struggle for their independence in the mids~ of incredibly complicated and difficult conditions. This was the year in wB.ich, as· Lenin said, we for the
first time "entered into the very heart of the revolution." This
was the year when Lenin said: "Better suffer and bear and put
up with infinitely great national and state humiliation and burdens and remain at our post as the socialist unit which events
had cut off from the main body of the socialist army and which is
compelled to wait until the socialist revolution in other countries
comes to· its aid."
Pyatakov's position is that beside Radek, against Lenin's thesis,
against Lenin. They, these "Left" Communists, are even prepared to surrender the Soviet power. As far back as 1918, these
gentlemen, having entrenched themselves in the Bureau of the
Moscow Committee of the Party, talked about the necessity, even
at the cost of losing the Soviet power, which in their opinion had
become merely a formal concept, of disrupting the Brest peace.
Stalin has quite justly described the Brest peace as a model of
Leninist strategy which provided forces with which to preparefor the repulse of the gangs of Denikin and Kolchak.
Pyatakov, Radek and their friends even at that time thought
and acted in a way that later called forth from Felix Dzerzhinsky
the apt and strong epithet he hurled at the Trotskyifes and
Zinovievites, nam.ely, "Rronstadtites." The Pyatakovs and Radek&
attached no value to the Soviet power. In their fight against Lenin
they went to such savage lengths that they talked about removing
the then existing Council of People's Commissars and substituting
fqr it a Council of People's Commissars consisting of people who
belonged to the coterie of the "Lefts." It was Pyatakov & Co.
who in 1918, in a period of extreme danger for the land of Soviets,
carried on negotiations with the Socialist-Revolutionaries \vith a
\.iew to bringing about a counter-revolutionary coup d'etat and
476

arresting Lenin so that Pyatakov might occupy the post of head
of the government, of chairman of the Council of •People's Commissars. It was through the arrest of Lenin, through a coup d'etat,
that these political adventurers wanted to lay for themselves the
road to power.
And what are they doing now? By attempting to overthrow the
Soviet power and to exterminate the leaders of our Party and of the
Soviet government-Comrade Stalin and his comrades in arms
-they wanted to lay a road for the restoration of capitalism
with the aid of foreign interventionist, aggressors' bayonets, with
the aid of terrorism, diversion, espionage, wrecking and every other
grave crime against the· state. Historical continuity is proved.
Jointly with Trotsky, Pyatakov rose against Lenin in the stern
days of Brest. Jointly with Trotsky, Pyatakov rose against Lenin
at the time our Party was effecting the complicated swing towards
the New Economic Policy. Jointly with Trotsky, Pyatakov opposed Lenin's plan to build socialism in our country, opposed the
industrialization and collectivization of our country which was
carried out under the brilliant leadership of our leader and
teacher, Comrade Stalin.
1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, 1919, 1921, 1923, 1926 and 1927-for
more than a decade Pyatakov constantly defended the Trotskyite
position, waged an open struggle against Lenin, against the general
line of the Party, and against the Soviet state.
1926 and 1936-this is the second decade of almost continuous,
.but now secret, underground struggle against the Soviet state
and our Party, a struggle which Pyatakov waged systematically
and untiringly until at last he was caught redhanded, detected,
.and placed in the dock as a traitor!
Such i~ Pyatakov and his portrait.
Much of what I have said about Pyatakov can be said about
·the accused Radek. Mor~ than once, both before and after the revolution, Radek opposed Lenin. In 1926, this Radek, in a debate at
the Communist Academy, jeered and sneered at the theory of
building socialism in our country, calling it the theory of building socialism in one county or even in one street. He even called
it a Schedrinian idea.
.
Apropos of this, Comrade Stalin wrO'te: "Can Radek's vulgar
and liberal jeering at the idea of building socialism in one country be called anything else than complete rupture with Leninism?"
Radek is one of the most outstanding, and, fo do him justice,
one of the most nble and persistent Trotskyites. "While Lenin was
alive he fought Lenin, and after Lenin's death he fought Stalin.
His quality as a social danger, as a political danger, is in direct
477

proportion to his personal ability. He is incorrigible. In the antiSoviet, Trotskyite centre he is the holder of the portfolio of foreign affairs. On Trotsky's instructions he carries on diplomatic
negotiations with certain foreigners or, as he expresses it, "puts a
visa" on Trotsky's mandate. Begularly_, through, so to speak, his.
own diploma,tic courier, Romm, he corresponds with Trotsky and
receives from him what he here grandiloquently calls "directives.'~
He is one of the men who is most trusted by and -intimate with the
big chief of this gang, Trotsky.
Sokolnikov. In HHS he, too, was opposed to Lenin. Even in
th-at year he threatened Lenin that he would resign over a political dispute. In 1920 he signed Bukharin's anti-Leninist trade union
platform. Iq 1924 he signed the "cave platform," the one that
was drawn up in a cave near Kislovodsk. In 1925 Sokolnikov,
slandering the Soviet state, asserted that our foreign trade, our
internal trading establishments, were state capitalist enterprises.
Similarly, he argued that the State Bank was also a state capitalist enterprise, that our monetary system was permeated with the
principles of capitalist economy. An apologist and ideologist of
capitalist economic policy!
Comrade Stalin pointed out at the time that Sokolnikov was
advocating the Dawes-ation of our country. Sokolnikov was
thoroughgoing advocate of the preservation of the economic
backwardness of our country, that is to say, of placing our country in bondage to the capitalist countries, of "transforming
our country into an appendage of the capitalist system.'' As you
see, Sokolnikov has not departed one iota from this position
today.
In 1925, while People's Commissar of Finance, Sokolnikov
complained about and slandered our Party and the Soviet government, arguing that they hindered him in his work of protecting
the dictatorship of the proletariat and of fighting the kulak, of
curbing the kulak. And now, Sokolnikov has confessed befofe
the whole world that the Trotskyite centre, of which he was one
of the leaders, calculated precisely on getting the support of the
kulaks, or rather, the miserable remnants of the kulaks. In this
court he himself said: "\Ve realized that in our program
principles we must revert lo capitalism and advance the program
of restoring capitalism, because then we would be able to rely
on certain strata in our country."

a

Question: Specifically on what forces within the country
did you calculate? On the working class?
Sokolnikov: No.
Question: On the collective farm peasantry?
478

Sokolnikov: Of course not.
Question: On whom, then?
Sokolnikov: To speak quite frankly, I must say that
we reckoned on being able to rely on the elements of the
peasant bourgeoisie. . . .
Question: On the kulaks, on the few remnants of the
kulaks?
Sokolnikov: That is so.
Thus, Sokolnikov arrived at a frankly kulak program, the
avowed defence of kulak interests, thus completing his fall. From
Sokolnikov's position in 1925-26 to ·the program of the Trotskyite
centre of 1933-36 it is quite a natural step.
Two words about Serebryakov, the fourth member of this antiSoviet Trotskyite centre. He signed Bukharin's program during the
trade union discussion in 1920; he was an active member of the
Opposition in 1923; he was an acfr•:e member of the Opposition
in 1926-27. Actually, as he himself has confessed in court, he had
never departed from Trotskyism. Clearly he had every right to
.claim a leading position in this anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre.
As old Trotskyites we know N. Muralov, Drobnis, Boguslavsky ·and Livshitz. We know that they devoted a number of years.
to the fight against Lenin and socialist construction in our country. Is it not clear that their participation in the anti-Soviet underground Trotskyite work, their participation in Trotskyite wrecking, diversion and terrorist groups, their treason to the country.
were prepared and were the direct results of all their past Trotskyite activities, the direct results of thdr long years of struggle against
the U.S.S.R., against the Soviet people'? The accused themselves
_had to admit this. For a long time they waged a stubborn and a
despicable war against socialism. Now they have been caught redhanded. The mask has heen torn from their faces once and for
all. They stand exposed as enemies of the people, as an insignificant, despicable handful of people who have become the agents
of foreign intelligence services.
These gentlemen tried to pose here as a political pa;rty. In court,
Pyatakov spoke of his •accomplices as a "faction," talked about his
"faction's" "political mistrust" towards the Zinoviev section of
the bloc. He talked about their "own organization," employing this
term in the political sense; he even spoke about Trotsky wanting
to pursue his "own" policy. Radek also referred to his accomplices
as political leaders. Speaking of the criminal wrecking demands
Trotsky put to him in his conversation with him, accused Pyatako,·
referred to them as a constituent part of Trotsky's policy.
479

Radck, one of the "realist politicians" who realistically betrayed their country by promising its enemies real and territorial
concessions, also talked here in a lofty style. Even in speaking
about such prosaic things as ordinary criminal wrecking Radek
tried to talk in a lofty style as if discussing political matters. During the session of January 24 Radek said: "It was clear that I was
being asked about the bloc's attitude. I tokl him . that realist
politicians in the U.S.S.R. understood the importance of a GermanSoviet rapprochement and were prepared to make the concessions
necessary to achieve this rapprochement. This representative understood that since I was speaking about realist politicians there
were, in the U.S.S.R., realist and unrealist politicians: the unrealist politidans were the Soviet ,government, while the realist.
politicians were the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc." Here they are,
these realist poli:ticians, sitting under guard . . . of only three
Red Army men! It is easy to understand that, strictly speaking,
this lofty .style was adopted out of sheer habit. It is easy to understand that this is not a political party at all; it is merely a gang of
criminals, not to be distinguished, or at best for them, hardly to be
distinguished from gangsters who use blackjacks and diaggers on
the high-road on a dark night.
This is not a political party. It is a gang of criminals, merely the
-agency of foreign intelligence services. To the straight question put
to Pyatakov: "Were the members of your organization connected
with foreign spies?" Pyatakov replied: "Yes, they were." And he related how this connection was established on the direct instructions of Trotskv. This was confirmed by Radek, the "parallel"
centre's expert ~n "foreign affairs." This was confirmed by Livshitz, Knyazev, Shestov and a number of. other accused-direct
and deliberate agents of secret services. This is really what this
gang is, which called itself a "political force," which wanted to
be taken for such. It is not a political party, but a gang of spies,
bandits, terrorists and diversionists.
The roots of this group are not in the masses of the people
of our country, whom this gang fears, from which it runs away
like the devil from holy water. This gang hides its face from the
masses of the people; it conceals its brutal claws and ferocious
fangs. The roots of this gang must be sought in the secret recesses
-0f the foreign espionage agencies which bought these people, which
kept them, paid them for their loyal, flunkey service. You have
seen these official and unofficial police spies and secret service
agents.
Pyatakov urges his subordinate:<; to organize explosions and acts
of diversion, preferably those causing loss of human life. Drobnis
480

argues that "the more victims the better" for the Trotskyites.
Shestov organizes murders. Livshitz, Knyazev and Turok Qrganize
the wrecking of trains. And Radek engages in "foreign politics";
and just as the aiIDi of Livshitz and Knyaiev was 'to derail trains,
so the aim of Radek's "foreign policy" was to ·derail the cause of
socialism, to open the gates to the foreign enemy, to the enemy
a!k,oressor. Each one of them stands before you, immersed in this
bloody morass of crime. Take separate groups: they are interwoven with foreign intelligence service agents who bought them
With promises of support, or simply for hard cash.
They blow up mines, they burn down workshops, they wreck
trains, they mutilate and kill hundreds of our best people, sons of
onr country. Eight hundred workers in the Gorlovka Nitrate Fertilizer \Yorks, through Pravda, communicated the names of the
best Stakhanovites in those works who died iby the treacherous
hand of the diversionists. Here is the list of these victims: LunevStakhanovite, born 1002. Yudin-a talented engineer, born 1913.
Kurk.in-member of the Young Communist League, Sta.khanovite,
23 years of age. Strelnikova-girl shock brigade worker, born
1913. Mosiets-shock brigade worker, also born 1913. These were
killed, .over a dozen were injured., Maximenko-a Stakhanovite
who fulfilled his norm 125 to 150per cent, was killed. Nemikhinone of the best shock brigade workers .sacrified his 10 iday•s' leave
to go down the Tsentraliiaya Pit, and there somebody waited for
him and killed him. Shot-firer Yurev-one of the men who took
part in the fighting against the White Chinese, was killed. Lanin,
an old miner, a participant in the civil war, was killed. And so 011
and so forth.
Comrade Judges! Their murderers are sitting here in front of
vou!
·
· Shestov organizes a bank Tobbery. Shestov arranges !for the
foul murder of engineer Boyarshinov, who seemed likely to expose
their criminal activities.
Arnold, an international tramp, who has been, I think, in
every country in the world, and everywhere has left tr.aces of his
fraudulent operations. In Minsik he forges a document. In iAm.erica
he becomes a sergeant in the American .army and is put into prison, as he himself confessed, on suspicion of stealing government
property. I think that if ever that man got his hands on government property it would go very hard with that government property. This is the man who through ±he Freemasons wanted to
get "into high society" in America, and through the Trotskyites-wanted to get into power, for which he secretly longed and sighed,
under tpe able leadership of a mentor such as the gallows-bird
Shestov.
481

It is a gang of bandits, robbers, forgers, diversionists, spies and
murderers in the literal sense of the word! This gang of murderers, incendiaries and bandits can only be compared wi~h the medi~val camorra which united the Italian nobility, vagabonds and
brigands. These are the moral features of thes e gentlemen, morally
corroded and morally depraved. These people have lost all shame,
including shame before their own accomplices, and even before
themselves.
.
·
·
_ These "politicians" thought nothing of pulling up rails and
causing train collisions. They thought nothing of gassing a mine
and of sending a dozen or several score of workers to their deaths.
They thought nothing of kililing an honest working engineer
underhandedly; of burning down a factory, of blowing up little
children who :had got into a dynamite dump.
A fine political party indeed!_ If it were a political party if
would not eonceal its program from the masses. A political party
does not hide its program, its political opinions. The Bolsheviksthat genuine political party, a party in the real and lofty sense
of the word-never hid from the masses and never concealed its
program.
At the <lawn of the Russian revolution Lenin wroie oif the
enormous importance which r~volutionary social-democracy attached to the open propaganda of its ideas, to the open declaration
o:f its aims, to the open mass agitation on !behalf of its iprogram,
tactics, organizational ideas and principles. The Party of Lenin
and Stalin .grew up, became strong and was transformed into an
enormous and migihty force as a Party which relied on the masses,
as a Party which was organically bound up with the masses.
That is the mark of a real political party. Not only does it not
conceal its views from the masses, it strives to spread them as far
as it possibly ·can among the masses. But this "party," as it calls
itself, was afraid, and is now afraid, to tell the people the truth
about itself, is afraid to speak about its program.
Why? Because the people hate their views and their program
as they hate capitalist bondage, capitalist oppression, which these
gentlemen want to restore, to impose upon the necks of our
people; because they became transformed into a group of outcasts
isolated from the people, a gang of criminals headed by their
ring-leader Trotsky, and his lieutenants Pyatakov and Racdek,
and other gangster "chiefs." This is not a plant of the land of Soviets. It is a plant of foreign origin, and it cannot grow, it cannot
bloom on Soviiet soil.
It is strange to hear these people talk about an agreement which
this "party," but what is really a. gang of criminals, concluded with
the Japanese and German fascist forces. ·with a grave air Pyata1

482

:kov, Radek and Sokolnikov talked about an "agreement" which
Tr-otsky concluded, or which Trotsky ha<l arrived at with Germany
and Japan. These gentlemen gravely told us that they calculated
on utilizing these countries in their own interests. But how can
one seriously talk about this when this very "parallel" centre is
·simply a wretched little gnat -compared with a wolf.
Agreement! They should have said simply: surrender to the
mercy of the conqueror. Of course it was not an agreement, but
surrender to .the mercy of the conqueror.
To listen to Pyatakov and Radek one would think that it
really was an agreement. Radek stated that he had sent Trotsky
a letter "in which I aicknowledged the ireceip~ of his directiYes
and foformed him that we had agreed among ourselves in the
Steps we took here not to .go further than to put our visa on 'his
mandate to negotiate with foreign states. Moreover, I added:
'Not only we officiaUy, as the centre, but I personally approve
of his seeking contacts with foreign states.' "
Radek and Pyatakov, if you please, "put their visa" on Trotsky's
"mandate" to negotiate with foreign states. But that is not the
chief thing. Nor is the chief thinig that the centre approves of these
negotiations. The chief thing is that I, Karl Radek, Minister of
.·Foreign Affairs of the centre, personally approve of Trotskythat Prime Minister-seeking contacts with foreign states. Of
course it wo_uld all sound very funny if the position of Pyat.akov
.and Radek were not so tragic. But to anybody who had not utterly
lost his head, for anybody who possessed a grain of reason, it
sb,ould ·have been clear that the agreement about which Pyatakov, ·
Trotsky and Radek spoke, was not an agreement, but embroidered
capitulation, the Trotskyite surrender to the mercy of the conquerors, that this was bondage, that to accept such an agreement
meant crawling into the wolf's mouth while consoling oneself
with the idea that the wolf is not wicked and will not gobble
one up.
This agreement reminds me of Krylov's fable "The Lion
Goes Hunting." In this fable the dog, the lion, the wolf and the
fox came to an agreement, "entered into a covenant" to go hunting together. The fox caught a deer and they began to share it.
One of the "contracting parties" says: "This part is mine according to the hond; this part surely is mine, for I am the lion, and
this part is mine ·because I am stronger than you all; and as for
this part, if any of you as much as puts his paw upon it, he will
not leave this place alive."
.
This "covenant" is very much like your agreement, Messrs. the
accused, Messrs. officers of German and Japanese fascism! This
is what happened to you, with this difference, perhaps, that in
483

your agreement the lion figures in the role of dog. That is why
I assert that this is not a political party at all. It is a gang of
criminals, people who are morally worthless, morally depraved,

who have lost all conscience and reason.
·
After what \Ve have heard from these people in this Court, ca':i:t
there be any doubt that they are utterly depraved. and morally
degraded? No, there c;an be no doubt.
While the Sovi:et people under the leadership of our Party
were toiling to strengthen their. new socialist positions, our enemy
-and this is its vanguard-slowly, treacherously tried to pierce
the front of our vidories, to outflank us and strike us in the rear.
Foreign spies are working unceasingly, seeking, and unfortunately
finding, allies ~n our country,- assistants among, it is true, depraved people who are hostile to the Soviet system and, as has
now !been fully and precisely proved, iprimarily among the
Trotskyites.
.
\Vhy are the foreign inte11igence services able to find agents
among the Trotskyites? Because the whole past and present
history of the· Trotsykites is proof of their irreconcilable hostility
to the Soviets, of their readiness to serve capital with the last
remnants of their conscience;· of their ability to employ the most
disgusting and despicable means in the fight and to stick at nothing.
At the Fifteenth All-Union Party Conference Comrade Stalin
emphasized tlh.at the Trotskyites and the bloc they organized at
that time were distinguished precisely for their "unscrupulousness
as to means, and la~k of principles in politics." This unscrupulousness in the political struggle has now gone beyond all bounds,
has reached monstrous proportions, has grown a thousand-fold.
Do not the articles which Pyatakov and Radek wrote about
their accomplices Zinoviev and Kamenev, these despicable traitors,
these downright bandits who killed OUJ;' unforgettable Sergei
Mironovich Kirov, testify to the extreme degree of moral depravity
they have reached?. Are not the articles in which Radek and
Pyatakov, with an air of outraged righteousness, demanded ·that
their own allies, friends and accomplices be shot, the acme of
cynicism and mockery at the last remnants of human conscience,
at the last conceptions of morality?
You want to know what the moral face of these gentlemen
is like? Read their articles which were published in our newspapers only a few months ago.
For example, Radek, in No. 3 of the Bolshevik for 1935, expose~what do you .think? The duplicity of Zinoviev and all the
:heads of the Zinoviev faction, as he expresses it. Radek, a master
484

at this trade, reveals great knowledge of the subjeet in this article.
With great gusto he tells his readers what duplicity is.
Permit me to quote Radek on ... Ra<lek's duplicity. He writes:
"Having slipped into counter-revolution, the ex~leaders of the
ZinoYievite-Trotskyite bloc have resorted to the methods of inter~entionist spies, dynamiters and wreckers. Duplicity proved to be
camouflage erntbling them to bombard the proletarian General
Staff."
\Ve know that Radek, who wrote this article, had known about
the preparations for the foul murder of Sergei Mironovich Kirov
long in advance. We 'know that he, Radek, was conspiring with
Zinoviev and Kamenev, the murderers of Comrade Kirov, whose
death bad been sealed by ibis very Radek and his friends now
sitfing_beside him.
·
And so, covering up the traces o.f his own .complicity in this
foul deed, Radek talks about exposed double-dealers who had been
handed over to the law-"which k!Ilows how to deal with those
who try to sha-ke the foundations of the proletarian revolution."
Yes, accused Radek, you were ri.ghtl Soviet law knows how
to deal with double-dealers and traitors like you and your
friends.
"-7hat did Radek write at the time of the trial of Zinoviev,
Kamenev and the others, of the trial of the traitors who had been
exposed in anti-Soviet criminal struggle? He wrote about the
"Trotskyite-Zinovievite fascist gang and its hetman-Trofsky"
{these are his own terms), that "the stench of corpses" .pervaded
the court-room in which that case was tried, and he excla~med with
passion: "Crush the vipers! It is not a matter of exterminating ambitious men who have gone to the length of committing a great
crime, it is a matter of exterminating the agents of fascism who
were prepared to assist in igniting the conflagration of war, to facil·l.tate the victory of fascism in order to receive from its hands at
least the shadow of power."
This is what Radek wrote. Radek thought he was writing about
Kamenev and Zinoviev. A slight error! This trial will rectify Radek's error. He was writing about himself!
Making grimaces, playing his double game, he wrote that in
1928 Trotsky tried to persuade him, Radek, to escape abroad and
that he, Radek, "was horrified at the idea of acting under the
protection of bourgeois states against the U.S.S.R.. and so sabotaged
the attempt to escape." In 1929, according to Radek, "he, Trotsky,
having persuaded the Trotskyite Blumkin to organize the smuggling of literature into the U.S.S.R., sent his son Sedov to Radek's
hotel with the instruction to organize raids ;on Sovie~ , Trade
Representations abroad for the purpose of obtaining money which
485

Trotsky needed for his anti-Soviet activities. From the ·expropriations which Trotsky was preparing in 1929, he, in 1931, passed to
preparations for terrorism, about whieh he gave direct instructions to Smirnov and Mrachkovsky, to people connected with him
for 18 years. Smirnov and ~frachkovsky, iby raising the sword
against Stalin and the Party, trampling upon the confidence that
had been shown them, fell so low that one cannot recall their
names wilhout feelings of revulsion."
- Comrade Judges, Radek then was not yet being tried, he was
not yet in the dock. That was not in 1936, and not even in 1935;
it was in 1929. And Radek states that Trotsky had instructed him to
organize the raid on our Trade Representation. Radek was then
at liberty, he was not being held by any Cheka, or G.P.U., or Commissariat of Internal Affairs; he was not being pestered with questions by the examining offi-cial, or the Procmator; he was free
citizen, he was a journalist, he freely smoked his pi·pe everywhere,
blowing smoke in the eyes of others besides his inter'locutors.
What did he write then? He wrote that he had received instructions from Trotsky to organize raids on Trade Representations to
obtain money that Trotsky needed for his anti-Soviet operations.
I think we cannot disbelieve this authoritative admission made before Soviet public opinion, not from the prisoners' 1dock, but in the
Soviet press. As you see, history repeats itself. And when we are
now told that in 1935 Trotsky persuaded Pyatakov, or rather, did
not persuade but ordered him, to organize the embezzlement of
Soviet money with the assistance of the firms of Demag and
Borsig, at the time when Sedov was arranging connections with
the firm of Dehlmann for the same purpos-e, we see that history
does repeat itself.
Further, when Radek wrote: "From the expropriation" (what
does expropriation mean? In plain Russian it simply means robbery)
-"From the expropriation . . . which Trotsky was preparing in
1929, he, in 1931, passed to preparations for terrorism, about which
he gave direct instructions to Smirnov and Mrachkovsky, to people
connected with him for 18 years"-we thought that he was
writing on the basis of the official records of the preliminary
investigation. It turns out, however, that what Radek wrote
was an authentic interpretation, that is to say, an interpretation
from the author's pen, from one of the co-authors. Further on he
wrote: "Smirnov and Mrachkovsky ... fell so low that one cannot
recall their names without feelings of revulsion." Did Radek write
that or not? He did. Alas, he did write it! Radek then pretended to
-be frank, pretended -to repent, to speak sincerely. He was very
indignant, swore, cursed, vowed, assured and repented. . . . Out

a

486

of pureness of heart? No, he lied. . . . Recalling 1929, when
Trotsky was preparing to rob our Trade Representations abroad,
he pretended to G:>e speaking sincerely. But no, he lied; he onlly pretended to speak the truth. He oursed his friends in order to divert
:l:t_tention from himself, in order, as he expressed it in his thieves'
jargon here, not to "get pinched." In spite of all that, however, he
did "get pinched." He resorted to the trick of a hardened criminaL He shouted: "Stop thief" in order to escape the hand of justice
himself. That is a common trick of those who speak the language
of "get pinched" and "bumped off." He tried to slip out of it, to
escape responsibility. He, Radek, tried to climb up on the corpses
of his friends and aocomplices in order to eseape from the stinking pit filled wit!.h blood and IlllUd in which he was submerged up
to his ears. With artificial, false and studied affectation he exclaimed:
_ "The proletarian court will pass sentence on these sanguinary
murderers, which they have deserved a hundredfold. People who
have raised the sword against the beloved leaders of the proletariat must pay with their heads for their unparalleled crime.
The chief.organizer of this gang and of !its ·deeds, Trotsky, has r11~
ready been condemned .by history to the pillory of shame. He
will not escape the verdict of the world proletariat."
You remember, Radek, you said then that these people, such
people, must pay for their crime with their heads? Radek wrote:
The chief organizer of this gang, Trotsky, has already been
condemned by history to the pillory of shame, he will not escape the
execration of the world proletariat. That is true. Traitors will not
escape the verQ.ict of the world proletariat any more than they will
escape the verdict of the Soviet Court, the Court of the great socialist
state of workers and peasants!
And what about Pyatakov? Pyatakov also wrote articles for the
newspapers in connection with the exposure of the gangster-terrorist united Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre. Pyatakov .raved and
fumed about the despicable counter-revolutionary activities, surrounded, as he wrote, by the unbearable stench of duplkity, lies
and deception. What will Pyatakov say now to brand his own
moral degradation, his own "stench of lies, duplicity and deception"? \Vill Pyatakov find the words, and if he does find
~them, what is the value ·of such words, who will believe
them?
Pyatakov wrote:
-«one cannot find the words fully to express one's indignation
and disgust. These people have lost the last semblance of humanity.
They must be destroyed, destroyed like carrion. which is polluting
the pure, bracing air of the land of Soviets; dangerous carrion
487

which may cause the death of our leaders, and has already caused
the death of one qf the be.st people in our land-that wonderful
comrade and leader S. M. Kirov."
·
Pyatakov sobbed over the corpse of Kirov whom he killed.
He bewailed him. "The enemy in our land of victorious socialism
iir elusive"-wrote Pyatakov, looking at himself in the mirror. "He
adapts himself to the surroundings," says Pyatakov admiring himself in the miriror. "He i:s dissembling." And Pyatakov says to
himself: I'm .a smart one at diiiSsembling, aren't I. "Lying." Humph,
thinks Py~takov to himself, how can one he1p lying in such a
situation? "Covering his tracks" . . . "workin:g himself mto confidence." . . .
Covering up the !bloody traces of his crimes Pyatakov wrote the
following:
"Many of us, including myse!f, by our heedlessness, our complacency and lack of viigilance towards those around us, unconsciously helped these bandits to commit their black deeds." An
astonishing trick! Pyatakov was not vigilant enough I This, it appears, is what Py.atakov is guilty of I This is another old trick
played by criminals. When a man is frccused of rn.uroer and robbery, he pleads guilty :to the charge of robbery. When .a man is accused Qi !burglary he pleads guiHy to the char,ge of larceny. When
he is ~ccused of larceny he, at most, pleads guilty to the charge
of ibeinig in possession of, or receiving, stolen property.
These are the old tactics of professionail criminals. Pyatakov
is afraid of being caug.ht, of being exposed, so he writes to the
newspapers attacking the enemy and does not spare himself. Oh,
poor, hlind Pyatakov, you don't see what is going on around you.
But it is not going on around you, you are doing it yourself!
Pyata:kov wrote: "It is a good .fuing that the Peoµle'•s Commissariat of Internal Affairs has exposed this gang." That is true,
it is a good thing. Let us thank the People's CommissarID.t of In~
ternal Affairs for having at last exposed this gaillg! "It is a good
thing that it can be exterminated." Quite true, accused Pyatakov, it
is a good thing that it can. But not only can it, tlt must be exterminated. "Honour and ·glory to the workers of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs." You are blaspheming, accused Pyatakovl
\Vhom <lid Pyata.kov write about on August 21, 1936? Pyatakov
wrote about himself. Pyatakov anticipated the inexorable march
of events.
What do the articles of Pyatakov and Radek tes.tify to? Do
they not testify to the extreme, literally infinite, moral degradation
of these people, to their moral worthlessness, to the depravity of
~hese people? Worthless, rotten, despicable creatures who have
lost the last remnants, not only of honour but even of reason, vile
488

manikins, "Malbroughs who to war did go" against the Soviet
state: shabby politicians, petty political sharpers, and bi.g bandits.
The united! Zinovieviite-Trotskyite centre and its active
members persistently tried to prove that they did not advance
any political progrrum demands-that they were merely imbued
with a "hare thirst for power." This is untrue. This was an attempt to deceive puhlic opinion. There crun be no struggle for
power withO'llt some kind of a program, a program that formulates
the aims, tasks, strivings and methods of struggle. Even at that
time we refused to believe that the united Trotskyite-Zip.ovievite
terrorist centre had no program of any kind. We knew that they
w~re persistently concealing it. And indeed it turned out that they
did have a program, J1,1st as this Trotskyite terrorist centre had a
program. This program. was an open assertion of the need for
capitalist restorati001 in the U.S.S.R. Sdkolnikov confirmed that,
in essence, it was the old Ryutin anti-Soviet program. And that is
true. Sokolnikov said:
"As for the lines of the program, as far back as 1932 -the
Trotskyites, the Zinovievites and the- Rights all a;greed iri· ijhe
main on a program which was characterized as the prograi'.n.of the Rights. This wias :the s~led Ryutin platform;· to -a Ja.rge
extent, as far back as 1932, it expressed the program policy
common to all three groups.
"As for the furt'.her development of this program, the leading members of the centre were of the opinion tll:iat as an
isolated revolution our revolution could ngt persist as a soci:a1ist
revolution, that the Kautskian t!hrory of- ultra-imperialism and
Bukharin's kindred! theory of organiized capitalism had proved
to be correct. We were of the op.inion flmt fascism iSI the most
organized form of capiitaJ:i.sm, it is conqruering, seizing Europe,
strangling us. Therefore, it would be better for us to come to an
agreement wirt.h it, better. to arrive at some compromise in the
sense of retreating f:rom socialism to capitalism."
But how to ''.come to an agreement"? Will the fascists be willing to "come to an agreement"? \Vill they not prefer ro a•ot without an a:g.reement, as they act everywhere, an over the world1, by
grabbing everything, throwing themselves upon, erushing and exlerminating the weak? Radek said that it was clear that:
"The masters of .the situation would be fascism--German
fascism on the one hand, and the military fascism of a FarEastern ~ountry, on the other."
And, o.f course, Tr-0tsky, their teacher, undersrood tihis no
less than they did<. The whole Trotskyite oentre undlerstood it.
They accepted H wifu open eyes. This was the second point of
their "remarkable" program.
489

The third point \vas the question of war and the defeat of
the U.S.S.R.
The fourth was the question of the consequences of the def eat: not only leasing as concessions the industrial enterprises
which the imperialisr states regarded a:s important, but selling
outright to private owners important economic units which they
had already ear.marked for this purpose; the loans referred to by
Radek; permitting. foreign capital to penetrate those plants which
would only officially remain in the hands of the Soviet state.
The fifth point was what they called the agrarirui problem.
The "parallel" centre solved the agrarian problem as easily as
Famusov solved the cultural problem-"oollect all the books
and burn them." This was the manner dn which they proposed
to solve the agrariall1 problem: burn all the gains of the proletarian revolution-dissolve the collective farms, liquida·te the
state farms, hand over the tractors andt other complex . agricultural machinery to individual farmers. ·what for? They answer quite frankly: "In order to create a new kulak system." Was
it to be a "new" one? Perhaps they simply meant the old one?
The sixth question \Vas the question of democracy. Radek
relat~d \.vhat Trotsky had written him on this subject. It is very
important for us to know this, particularly now, when our
country has reached the highest point of development of proletarian, socialist democracy as expressed in the great Stalin. C_onstitution recently adopted and confirmed by our people. How
was the question of democracy presented in the Trotskyite program? ·what did K. Radek, who had received a letter from his
teacher, say about -democracy?
"In this letter Trotsky said" (I am quoting Radek's testi_mony):
"There can be no talk whatever about democracy. The.
working class has experienced 18 years of . revolution" (now
it is already 19 years) "and its appetite is enormous . . . ."
This is true. Such an enormous appetite that it will gobble up,:
as it has done more than once, any enemy. ·
" ... and these workers will have to be put hack, partly to
private factories, and partly to state factories which will have:
to face the very severe competition of foreign capital. Hence/
there will !be a very serious deterioration in the conditions ofJ
the working class."
And what about the rural districts?
'~
·"In the rural distl'icts the struggle of the poor and middl~
peasants against the kulaks will be resumed. And then, in orde~
to be able to hold on, a strong governm~nt will be needed, irres;,~
_pective of the forms in which it will be clothed. If you wan~
490

.,~

historical analogies take the analogy of the rule of Napoleon I
and ponder over it."
In all probability Radek dlid: ponder over it a great deal.
Finally, the seventh question was the program of foreign
;policy, of partitioning the country: "Give the Ukraine to Ger:many; the Maritime Province and the Amur region to Japan."
·i;fben we inquired about certain other economic concessions. Radek
;r:eplied: Yes, we elaborated the decisions of which I have already
"fil'Pken. Payment of indemnities in · the form o.f supplies of
{oods_tuffs, raw materials and fats over a long period of years.
"I'hen-at first he did no<t quote any figures, but afterwards he
,spoke more definitely--ensuring the victor countries a certain
Jl>ercentage of participation in Soviet imports. All this taken together implied the complete enslavement of the country.
• c;•.• I asked: wa:s Sakhalin oil discussed?
"Radek: Concerning Japan it wa:s said that it was necessary
·not .only to surrender to her Sakhalin oil but to ensure her a
~pply of oil in the event of war· with the United States of Amerliea Reference was made to the necessity of placing no obsta~les in the way of the conquest of China by Japanese im~~m."

~; ~And what about the Danube countries?
~t.. "Radek: Concerning the Danube and Balkan countries, Trots~ in his letter wrote that German fascism is expanding and
~e -must do nothing to hinder that. Obviously thiis meant the
~-tion of a11 our relations with Czechoslovakia that would
~elp to ·protect that country."
'ffi)l;o. These are the seven main questions of fue so-clliled · pro~
~ of the centre, whose aim was violently to overthrow the
~S'l>+iet power for the purpose of changing tihe existing social
~d state system in the U.S.S.R. and the restoration of the rule
,;):he·bourgeoisie in our country; whose object was to strike
·'llow at democracy, at the cause of peace, at peaceful demo:·. ··-c countries, and-to help the bloodthirsty imperialist ag. ~ve coµntries of the fascist type.
" ~...:\\:1Jiat did t!iis program mean for the working dass, for the
· ,.ntry, for the cause of peace, for the interests of the Soviet

le?
_, · is program means a reversion to the past, the liquidation
.. <the gains of the workers and peasants, the liquidation of
Victories of socialism, the liquidation .of the Soviet, socialist
. . The ·socialist system is a system without exploitation
:_xploiJers, it is a system without merchants afP. manu,_,er"5, without poverty a·nd unemployment; it is a system
491

under which the workers and peasants are the masters, a
system nnder which ali the exploiting dasses have been abolished, and in which only the working class, the peasant class
and the intelligentsia have remained.
The Trotskyites are dissatisfied: with this. They warit to
change the present social system in our country. They want todestroy the working class ·which, thanks to the victory of
socialism, has ~ome transformed into an entirely new class,
.into the working class of the U.S.S.R.; they want to force it back
to the position it oocupied before the October Revoliution, tothe position of slaves bound in capita.list chains.
This is· what the Trotskyite pfatform o.f capitalist restoration in the U.S.S.R. means for the workers of our country and
for tihe workers of the whole world.
Our Soviet peasantry is a new collective farm peasantryit is quite unlike the peasantry in capitalist countries. In capitalist ·countries the peasantry leads a Hfe of poverty, of semistarvation, or even complete staTVation. As Comrade Stalin said,
scattered over the face of the whole· country "they plough their.
lonely furrow in their small farms with backward technical
equipment, they are slaves of private property and are ex-ploited
with 'impunity by the landlords, the kulaks, the merchants-, the
profiteers, the usurers, and tihe like."
"There· is no longer suoh a peasantry in our CO'UJiltry," said
Stalin at the Extraor<llinary Eighth Congress of Soviets. "In our
country there are no longer any landlords and kulaks, merchants and usurers to exploit the peasants. Co11sequently, our
peasantry is a peasantry emancipated from exploitation. . .."
As you see, said Comrade Stalin, the Soviet peasantry is an entirely new peasantry, the like of which tbe history of mankind
has never known before.
The Trotskyites don't like this, and they want to change this
situation too. They want to bring the kulaks and the landlords back to 'the rural districts, to restore the power of the
kulaks, to reinstate the landlords and kula!ks in the rural districts,
to put the peasants in bondage to the kiUlaks, to deprive our
collective farm peasantry of the rights they have won with their
blood.
This is what the Trotskyite program of capitalist restoration
means for the peasantry of our country; it means putting our
country baek 'again into the hands of the capitalists, kulaks and
landlor<lis.
· And finally, the Trotskyites are dissatisfiedl wiitih the fact
that the victory of socialism in 'the U.S.S.R. has transfonned the
intelligentsia from the handmaid o.f capital into an equal mem492

lir-:of Soviet society. The Trotskyites are dissatisfied with the
,fact that our intelligentsia "side by side with the workers and
;J>.easants, pulling_ together with them, 'is engaged :inJ building the
)Jew, cla.Ssless, socialist society." (Stalin.) They are diissatisfied
}~vith this, too. They want to change the social and political
~ystem in the U.S.S.R. This means changing the social and
p()litical position, and the role in our state, of· the workers,
~peasants and intelligentsia, and to force them back to the position they occupied in the old capitalist society, to throw them
intQ the swamp of exploitation, unemployment, hard, dreary
,and dull toil, eternal poverty and· starvation.
This is what the seven points of this program of restoring
capitalism mean .
. .That is why Zinoviev, Kamenev and the other ringleaders of
the anti-Soviet united Trotskyite bloc concealed this program, persistently denying its existence. This program was also concealed by the chiefs of the "parallel" centre, by Trot.sky, Pyatakov, Radek, Sokolnikov and the others.
As Radek testified, Trotsky urged! that "program questions
must not be ,put before the rank and file members of the bloc
ill all their scope. It will scare them ... " Radtek said:
"It was clear to me and! to Pyafakov that these directives
brought the bloc to the last limit, that in summing up and indicating the prospects of the work of the bloc it removed
all doubts about its bourgeoi.s character. Of course we could not
admit fuis open1y for this would ihave confronted us with the
necessity either of admitting that we were fascists, or of raising
the question of dissolving the bloc." (Vol. V, p. 147.)
· Incidentally, is this not the reason why Raidek failed to
oonvene the conference? What would they have discussed at
this conferen~e? The restoration of capitalism? The dfamemberment of the U.S.S.R.? The partitioning of the territory of the
U.S.S.R.? Territorial concessions? Selling our territory to the
Japanese and German annexationists? Espionage and wrecking?
They concealed these points of their program, its main points.
But we know that hidJden. things shall be brought to light. And
this shameful program of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite bloc was also
prought to <light.
·
The existence of this program was admitted here by Pyatakov, Radiek and Sokolnikov; they themselves told us about it in
~ Comt.
.
But perhaps tit is all an inventiQn? Perhaps they said this
simply because they wanted to play Ute mmedy of repentant
sinners? Since they have repented they must talk about some493

thing or other, they must expose something or other. Perhaps
Trotsky never gave them such a line?
But, Comrade Judges, you know, everybooy knows, that
abroad, Trotsky publishes the so-called Bulletin of th,e Opposition, and if you take No. 10 of this Bulletin, for April 1930, you
will find tha:t it contains what, in essence, is the same thing:·
" . . . All the same, retreat is inevitable. It must be carried
out as soon as possible. . . .
~- ·
" . . . Put a stop to 'mass' collectivization.
" . . . Put a stop to the hurdle race of industrialization. Revise
the question of tempo in the light of experience. . . .
" . . . Abandon the 'ideals' of self-contained economy. Draw
up a new variant o.f a plan providing for the widest possible intercourse with the world market. . . .
" . . . Carry out the necessary retreat, and then strategical
rearmament. . . .
·
" . . . It will be impossible to emerge from ,fue present contradictions wi:thout crises and .struggle. . . ."
In 1933 L. Trotsky demanded:
a) The dissolution of the majority of the colleetive farms as
being fictitious;
_
b) Dissolution of the state farms as being unprofitable;
c) Abandonment of the policy of liquidating the kulaks;
d) Reversion to the concessions policy and the leasing as concessions of a number of our industrial enterprises as being unprofitable.
This program not only expressed the views, hopes and aspirations of the TrotskyHe counter-revolutionaries, but, as the investigation has proved, it served a.s the hasis of an agreement !between
the Trotskyites and the foreign aggressors who are gazing longingly at our Soviet land. This investigation has proved that on the
basis of this prograIIl\, Radek, Pyatakov and their accomplices
started and carried on negotiations with the foreign· aggressors,
willi their representatives,. in anticipation of military aid from
them, and promising them various economic .and political advantages, including the .surrender of parts of the Soviet territory. The
traitors were ready for anything, even for selling their native !la!nd.
They conspired to commit the blaokest treason; they sank lower
than the worst Denikinites or Kolchakites. The worst Denikinites
or Kolchakites were superior to these traitors. The Denikinites,
Kolchatkites, MHyukovites, did not sink as low as these Trotskyite
Judases, who sold their native land for 30 pieces of silver, ·and
these counterfeit; who tded to place our -country in honda_ge lo
fo~eign capital. These are facts. The investigation has established
them, and no ohe can controvert them.
494

Is it surprismg that our people reject such a progr_?-m of
treachery; that if a propagandist took this program to our factories
and wor-ks, to our collective farms and our Red Army barracks,
he would be immediately seized and hanged at the nearest lamppost. And it would serve him right, for traitors deserve no other
fate than the gallows. This program is a program of black treason.
To it we oppose our program, the program of the Soviet govern. ment. It is useless trying to make it appear that this is a struggle,
a controversy between two factions, one of which was lucky <and
c.ame into power, and the other was unlucky, "out of luck," and
did not get into power.
This is a life and death strugg,le between two programs, two
opposite sets of principles, two mutually hostile trends and views
which reflect the respective sets of principles. As against this
black program of the Trotskyites we advance our P!ogram of
liquidating capitalism, of liquidating aU the remnants of capital·
- ism in our country. The whole of our Soviet country, all the
workers, peasants antl intellectuals, under the leadership of our
great Party, the Party of Leillin and Stalin, under the leadersihjp
of our great leader and teacher, Stalin, are heroically fighting ror
this program, tirelessly working to strengfu.en 01Ur state independence, the in<lependence and inviolability of our frontiers and of
our territory.
In a great :patriotic effort never witnessed in tsarist RUJSsia or
in any capitalist state, in a great Soviet patriotic effort, the heroic
toilers of the U.S.S.R. are building our new, socialist motherland.
All the peoples of O'llr country are imbued with an enthusiasm,
unpreeedented in history, which is performing miracles. Great is
our love for our country, for our motherland!
- "In the past we had no motherland nor could we have one,"
said Comrade Stalin in 1931. "But now that we have overthrown
capitalism and the workers are in power, we have a motherland,
and we will defend its independence." The whole population of
our country loudly repeats these words of Comrade Stalin so that
·!he world may hear. And it is prepared at the first call of the 1Party
and the government to rise like one man to defend our motherland.
Comrade Stalin said that "our policy is a :policy of peace"
and that we will "pursue this"policy of peace also in future with all
our might and all our means. Not a span· of foreign land do we
desire. But of our land, not an inch of our land shall we surrender to anybody." Let our enemies firmly bear this in mind.
Our great Russian people, our great peoples-Ukrainian, Byelornssian, Uzbek, Georgian, Azerbaijan, Armenian, Tatar, and all the
other numerous peoples of the U.S.S.R. stand like a living wall
495

guarding our frontiers, guarding every inch of our sacred Soviet
soil!
"\Ve are filled with a sense of national pride/' wrote Lenin,
"at the fact that the Great-Russian nation has also created a revolutionary class, has also shown that it is capable of giving
humanity great examples of st!ruggle for liberty and for socialism
and not only .great pogroms, rows of gallows, dungeons, great
famines and great cringing before priests, tsars, landlords and
ca,pitalists." (Collected Works, Vol. XVIII, p. 81.)
And in front of you, Comrade Judges, are sitting men who
wanted with the aid of foreign bayonets to sUibjoot our country
to carpitalist slavery. Concernhl!g these and similar people Lenin
once wrote that they "are toadies and cads who rouse a legitimate
feeling of anger, contempt and disgust." These men, these toadies
and cads of capitailism tried to trample underfoot the great an9.
sacred ·sentiments of our national, om Soviet, .patriotic pride, they
jeered at our liberties, at the sacrifices our people have made for
their liberties; they betrayed our people and went over to the side
of the enemy, to the side of the aggressors and agents of capitalism.
The anger of our peopil.e will destroy these traitors, reduce them
to ashes and wipe them from the face of the ea.Fth.
As was established at the preliminary investigation and at this
trial, one of the ·points of the program of the anti-Soviet, Trotskyite
centre wa'S the acceleration of war, and the defeat of the U.S.S.R.
in this war. Through war and defeat to >COine to power, to ieapture
power, and to utilize it for the purpose of restoring capilailism.
The Trotskyitc centre consisting of Pyatakov, Radek, Sokolnikov and .Serebryakov, realized, of ·course, the utter hopelessness
of their criminal designs to overthrow the Soviet power and to
sdze power at a time when our Union was at peace and; in: the
process of peaceful development. They realized, o.f course, that
there were no forces lin our country they could count rupon_ 3:§. ef.
fective for their purpo.ses. That is why the ringleaders of this
centre placed their reliance mainly on war, on a military attack
on the U.S.S.R. by an aggressor, on the outbreak of war, on en:
suring the victory of the enemy and our defeat in this war, which
they would help to bring a!bout.
lil his conversation with Pyatakov in Deceimber 1935, Trotsky,
according rto-Pyataikov, lS.poke openly a'bout war being inevitable in
the very near future. \Ve verified this as much as we could here.
The date, 1937, was mentioned.
I cannot refrain from mentioning a fact that was examined
in camera yesterday. Precisely in connection with Trotsky's line,
and evidently with that of correspoµ,ding competent circles and
instilutions of a certain foreign state with which Trotsky had
496

come to an agreement, 1937 was chosen because it was necessary
to take a number of measures that would by that date r·eally
ensure the defeat of the U.S.S.R. Yesterday, in camera, Pyatakov
and Rai:aichak gave full details of what they had done to ensure
our defeat in the event of war breaking out in 1937, particu'1arly
in -connection with O'llr army's supplies of the necessary means
en defence. They revealed to us yester<llay how profoundly and
monstrously despicable were their plans to betray our country to
the enemy. They revealed how they wantoo by means of their
plan to disarm our Red Army, our colllntry, our pwple at the
most important and dangerous period in the event of war breaking out.
.
Now we understand why their plans were so drawn up as to
create a grave situation for us in regard to certain measures of
defence pr~cisely in 1937 .
. It was precisely for 1937 that the monstrous -crime revealed
in camera yestel"<fuy was planned. It was precisE:ly in 1937 that
they banked <Yn our defeat.
.
We must remember that ten years ago Trotsky justiifled his ~e­
featist position in regar<l to the U.S.S.R. by referring to the
famous Clemenceau thesis. Trotsky then wrote: "\\7 e must restore the tactics of Clemenceau, who, as is well known, rose against
the French Government at a time whe.J. the Germans were 80
kms. from Paris." Comralde Stalin subjected Trotsky, this "comic
opera Clemenceau" and his ''<Don Quixote ·group" to withering
criticism. It was not an accident that Trotsky and his accomplices
advanced the Clemenceau thesis. They reverted to this thesis
once again, but this time advancing it not as a theoretical proposition, but as practical preparation, real preparation, in alliance
with foreign intelligence services, for the defeat of the U.S.S.R.
in war.
L. Trotsky and the anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre tried by hook
and crook, 1})y every means in :their power, to hasten the ·a~<:Tfessor's
attack upon the U.S.S.R.
"Hasten the collision"-provoke war, prepare for the defeat
of the U.S.S.R.-this was the program of the Trotsikyite "centre"
in the sphere of, so to speak, "foreign policy."
.
.
This "program" is a program of for~ign spies, of agents of
foreign intelligence services who, whenever they coul<l, penetrated
~ very midst of their enemy and tried to disrupt :his ranks from
within. This is what the program of the Trotskyite centre amounted
to in the sphere of so-called foreign policy.
Two programs stand confronting each other as irreconcilable
morfal enemies. Two pr9grams, two camps.J On the one 'hand, a
mi5erah1e clique, isolated from the people and hostile to the people,
497

a dique which had become the agents of foreign intelligence services; and on the other hand, the Soviet government, supported by
the whole of the population of the U.S.S.R. Two programs, two
diametrically opposite lines of struggle.
Quite naturally, therefore, their principles, their line for war;
for the defeat and disruption of our state, for betraying its interests ·to bellicose fascism, logicaUy led to a num~r of other
practical steps and measures whkh the Trotskyite organization
carried out under the guidance of its 'f.rotskyite anti-Soviet
centre.
Radek and Pyati:kov confirmed in Court that in the preparations for military defeat, the principail methods resortE'.d to by
the traitors in the "centre" were wrecking and diversion.
Pyatakov testified that during his meeting with Tcotsky the
latter explained to him that one of the points o.f the agreement
he had arrived at with the representatives of the German NationalSocialist Party was that he undertook:
" . . . during a war waged by Germany against the U.S.S.R ....to take up a defeatist position and intensify divcrsionist activities,
particularly in enterprises of importance for the defence of the
country . . . to ad on Trotsky's instructions which were adopted
in agreement \Vith the German General Staff."
As has now !been established by the investigation, in carrying
out the ®ligations thus undertaken, the "parallel" .or simply, the
anti-Soviet, Trotskyite, centre, did indeed organize in a number of
enterprises in the Soviet Union an extensive system of wrecking
operations and even diversions carried out by diversionist and
wrecking groups especially organized by them. Accordingly the
"parellel" centre put their men not only in our industry, but also on
our railways. We saw how this was done. If in the centre's opinion,'
the wrecking and diversionist operations in Western Siberia were
going ba<lly, or not satisfactorily enough: Pyatakov hastens there,
sends Drobnis especially for the purpose of strengthening the
West-Siberian centre which was directing the diversionist and
wrecking operabions there.
vVe know that the distribution of their forces was carried out,
not haphazardly, but accordling to plan. Tihere were special people
to whose addresses spies who· arrived from abroad were sent. These
spie~ were also placed according to a definite plan; they were
sent precisely to those places where it was thought necessary to strike the most palpaMe blow, as Pyatakov and Trotsky
put it.
. -In the centre Pyatakov takes charge of the direction of diversiye and wrecking operations. The directiqr,i of wrecking and
cliversive operations on the railways is entrusted to Serebrya.o.
498

kov in conjunction with Knyazev, Turok and Bogusla'Vsky.
Naturally, the :criminal centre paid very considerable attention to Kuzbas, and in particular, to Kemerovo. It is not an accident that it was precisely in ·western Siberia tha_t a fairly strong
territory centre is set up, consisting of the tried Trotskyites: Muralov, Drobnis and Boguslavs·ky. Pyatakov takes to himself as immediate assistants: Rataichak and Norkin. Muralov and Drobnis
rely on Shestov and Stroilov.
The principal wrecking and diversive forces are distrib..:
uted fairly skilfully, and according to a definite plan. The
principal wrecking and diversionist actif is not 6-cattered; but
concentrated. These forces are concentrated according to all the
rules of secrecy. These forces are concentrated on the largest, most
important enterprises, primarily those of defence importance.
Here they also take into a.ocount the numerous difficulties thal
naturally arise in connection with the organization af new enterprises, such as, for example, the o·rganiz.ation of the huge Kemerovo plant. They take absolutely everything into aocount. \Ve can·
say that they took the smaJlest detail into account. Everything ls
weighed in a "business-like" manner, if this term could be used
in this connection without degrading the term business man. Pyatakov behaves here precisely like the owner, like· the organizer of
this wrecking !business.
· ·
He is a man who leads a double life. He approaches al:l things;
e\·en a wrecking and a diversive ad, with careful calculation,
turning over in his mind what should be done, and how and when
it should be done; he does not opwate on .guerrllla warfare liries.
Pyatakov is opposed to guerrilla warfare in the sphere of ter-·
rorism, in the sphere of wrecking, and in b.-,_e sphere of diversions:
He works according to sr!:rid business principles, -that is to say.
to do wrecking work at the place, at the time and to the extent
that cirCumstanoes permit and assist him. He is the :nmn who
calculates the circumstances. He is the mari who takes stock of the
situation. He is the man who oolcuiates the forces. He is the man
who calculates the means. He is also the man who holds iri his hands
the means of camouflaging the whole business. Hence the fairly
wide, systematic ramifications of wrecking and diversive activities,
the monstrousness of which simply cau?es one lo shudder. At the
preliminary investigation Pyatakov testified: ·
"I advised my people (and did this myself) not to scatter thejr
wrecking work, but to concenfrate al1 their attention on the prin.:
cipal, big industrial enterprises, which are impartant for defence,
and of all-Union importance.
"On this point I operated according to Trotsky's instnictions:
'to strike palpable blows in the most sensitive plaees.r"

499

To do him justice, Pyatakov knew how to strike palpable
blows in the really sens!tive places.
We have seen during the trial what this Trotsky-Pyatakov
formula meant in action: it meant spoiling and destroying machines, instaUations and whole enterprises; the burning and blowing up of whole workshops, mines and factories; the wrecking of
trains and the loss of human life.
In the course of our history we have seen not a few crimes
committed against the rufo of the workers, against the proletarian
dktatorship. Oµr history contains revolting pages of atrocious conspiiraCies againsit the Soviets. We remember the "S:hakhty case"
and as living witnesses of those trials, we remember the "Industrial Party" case and the case of the Menshevik Uni.on Bureau. But
it will be hardly an exa:ggeration to say that in the art of wrecking,
cynicism and despicable idiversionist practice, the Trotskyites hav~
left their forerunners far behind; that in this sphere they have excelled the most hardened and incorrigible criminals. If we compared Pyatakov with his forerunners in this sphere I think that the
latter would pale into insignificance copsi<lering the magnitude of
tlle treacherous criminal <leeds which Pyatakov managed to commit
whi~ concealing his criminal activities under the cloak of his high
position in the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry.
In organizing wreoking and diYerstve acts the Trotskyite anti'SO'viet centre in fa.ct, simultaneously strove to carry out two tasks:
.Cme was the tas<k of undermining the economic power of the Soviet
:state and the defence capacity of our country; the other was the
task of causing disaffection among the workers and toilers, amo~
the population of our country against the Soviet .government, to
incite the pe0'pile against the Soviet government.. They tried tQ
carry out the second task by committing the most savage
·crimes. They did not shrirnk from committing these crimes; on
'the contrary, they tried to organize them on the widest possible
·scale, tried to increase the number of the victims as mucli as pos:sible. And Pyatakov is wrong when he says that he regarded
·"this" as inevitable. He did not have the courage to tell the whole
truth here, wthich DrOibnis, sitting behind him, told.
The centre <liid not regaro the explosions, arson, train wrecking involviIJJg loss of human Efe, as something unavoida'.ble. The
<Organization of crimes of this kind was part and parcel of the
c~ntre's plan. Drobnis said:
. "It wHl eyen be better if there is loss· of life in the mine, as it
will· undoubtedly ca-u~ disaffection among the workers, and this
1~ What we want."
·.
Knyaz~v said that Livshitz instructed him:
"To prepare for and carry out a number of diversive acts
.500 .

(explosions, train wrecks, or poisoning) whioh would be accompanied by great los3 of human life."
Comrade Judges, during this trial a number of atrocious scenes
passed before your eyes, and I m'ust now recall them to your mind.
I must recall the explo...'itlon in the Tsentrainaya Pit which resulted
in the death of 10 workers and severe injury to 14 workers. I must
also remind you of the train collision at Shumikha Station which
resulted in the death of 29 Red Army men and the injury of another 29 Red Army men.
.
.
It is characteristic. that in committing these crimes th~ conspirators very coolly and deliiberately covered u.p their traces~
that is, they tried to cover them up. ·We saw that in the case of
the poisoning of the workers in December 1935 at Section 6 in th~
Sewrny Kihodok district, in Kemerovo, Peshekhonov and other
members of the Trotskyite wreckiillg organization drew up a report
which concealed the fact that the poisoning had been deliberate.·
Here, in this court, Knyazev and Turok had to confirm that a num~
her of train disasters they organized went unpunished because they
cynically, skilfully, and successfully destroyed all the clues.
\Ve know that these people did not scruple to deliberately misinform the investigation authorities as to who was responsible
for the train disasters they organized, that they knew how to throw
the blame on absolutely innocent people, as was the case with the
switch-girl, Chudimwa.
.
Here they worked accocdiing to a monstrous gangster system
which spares nobody, which did not scruple to. strike not only
against those whom they were actually fighting, but against everybody who cros.sed their criminal path.
It must be said that the organization and execution of diversive and wrecking acts was greatly facilitated by the fact that these
people had succeeded, by deceiving us, in securing a number of
responsible key positions in industry and on the railways; The
expert technical comrnissibns which reported their findings here,
wry precisely and definitely established that all the so-called
break-downs, and explosions, and fires, which it was at first atteI11pted to represent as being the result of accidents, were in fact
wilfully and deliberately engineered by the wreckers. It has beei.~
established that af the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer Works three
acts of diversion were carriea out in a relatively short period of
time under the direction of the accused Rataichak. These included
two explosions which caused the loss of human life, besides e11tailing very heavy material damage to the state.
Comrade Judges, in order fully to appraise the utter monstrosity of these c11imes we must not lose sight of the fad:! that
not only were these crimes committed, but that they were com"
501

mitted by people who were entrusted with the protection of the
interests of our State against every kind of encroachment. Rataichak, who should have been .the first to proted our chemical in. dustry from any encroachment andi to safe-guard it from all
.<Iamage, actually betrayed it. He aded like. a downright traitor. If
-ht~ committed such a crime in time of war he would .be lialble to he
·shot on the spot, immediately annihilated.
On Raitaiohak.'s instructions, the Trotskyite organization also
committed similar diversive acts in other chemical ·plants of
the_ Union. The diversive nature of thes~ explosions has been
~stablisihed and admitted by the accused; it is proved by the
testimony of witnesses and by the special technical experts who
here dotted all the i's and left no doubt whatever that they were
the result m cliversive acts.
I would like to deal briefly with the experts' answers. I asked
the experts lo reply to a number of questions concerning the explosion which took place in the hydrogen department of the Gorlovka Fertilizer Works in November 1935. To the direct question
whether there had been any possibility of averting this explosion,
the experts replied: certainly there had been. What should have
been -done to avert these explosions?
It transpires that very little had to be done. All that was required was to adhere to the safety regulations. The safety regulations ensure normal and! safe work. But this was not done.
Hence the explosion. And when we asiked the experts: but perhaips,
after all, the explosion was an accident? We verified the evidence
of the accused. The experts replied: "l'vfaHcious intent is indisputable."
With the assistance of the experts we verified the evidiernce
of the accused, and although we know that according to the laws
of certain European countries the confession of an accused person is regarded as sufficiep.t proof of guilt and the court does u-ot
consider itself obliged to call corroborating evidence, we, however,
in order to observe strkt impairtiality, notwithstanding the confessi©ns of the criminals themselves, verified their statements once
again from the technical side and obtained a categorical reply
concerning the explosion of November 11, the fires in the Prokopyevsk .mine, and the fires and ex·plosions at the Kemerovo
plant. Malicious intent was estalblished without ·any possibility
of do'Ulbf.
Thus, we have ·a widely ramified system of wrecking and
diversire measures embracing the branches of our industry
whioh are most important from the point of view of our all-Union
;interests and from the point of view of defence, and the defence
capacity of our state.
502

The Trotskyite centre organized fairly widely ramified wreck-

illg and diversive measures also on the railways. We have already established the active role played in this nightmarish crime,
or rather, in this sum of nightmarish crimes, by Livshitz, Turok,
Knyazev and Boguslavsky. But here, too, I cannot refrain from singling out Livshitz because, as in the case of Pyatakov, we have here
the limit of all conceivable crime. Indeed, Livshitz was not merely
a worker on the railways, he was not merely one of the responsible
officials of the People's Commissariat of Railways Livshitz was
the Assistant People's Commissar of Railways. In this respect
he differs in no way from Pyatakov, notwithstanidinig the fact that
his was a secondary role as compared with Pyatakov's. When our
industry and rai.lways, under the brilliant direction of Comrades
Sergo Orjonikidze and Lazar Moiseyevich Kaganovi.ch, overcomfag all sorts of difficulties, day after day, month after month,
year after year rose to higher and higher levels, the men whose
duty it was to assist them, insolently am! treacherously deceived
them, deceived us all, our Party, our people.
That is why I think that in regard to Pyatakov, ex-Assistant
People's Commissar of Heavy Industry of the U.S.S.R., in regard to Livshitz, ex-Assistant People's Commissar· of Railways,
and in regard to Sokolnikov, ex-Assistant People's Commissar
of Foreign Affairs-in regard to these three persons, as persons
in whom had been vested special confidence, special state responsibility to our country-the question of their criminal responsibility should he dealt with separately even if no other
monstrous crimes burdened their shou'.lders.
Aecused Knyazev, on the direct instructions of the "parallel"
Trotskyite centre, organized and caused the wreck of a number
of trains, mainly troop trains, causing considerable loss of life.
There was the wreck at Shumikha Station in which 29 Red Army
men were kil1ed and 29 Red Army men were injured; there was
the wreck on the Yaklhnin<r--Ust-Katav section, the wrecking of
troop trains and freight trains. Knyazev or:ganfaed tlhese, as was
revealed, not only on the instructions of the "parallel" Trotskyite
centre and, in particular, o£ Livshitz, but also on t:ihe direct instructions of the agent of a foreign power-the agent of the
Japanese intelligence service, M:r. H--, who was really one of the
mainsprings of Knyazev's and Turok's criminal activities.
Knyazev testified that the organization of the wrecking of troop
trains was a part of the series of measures intend~ to strike at
our Red Army, and it must be admitted that these criminal
measures might have dealt us a very telling blow.
This i$ 'how the interests of the Trotskyite organization became
interwoven with the interests of the foreign intelligence services.
503

They could not but be interwoven, because they both had a common political goal and common methods of work, and were organizationally connected. This, strictly speaking,. obliterated all
lines of distinction between the Trotskyite organization and the
organization of the Japanese or German intelligence services.
We verified the espionage and diversive connections of Kny"azev and Turok in camera and the identity of this Mr. H--, and
all the circumstances to which the accused testified in Court, were
established with absolute precision.
·Here I must recall two letters in the files which reveal Knyazev's connection with this Mr. H--. These letters once again, and
quite objectively, confirm Knyazev's testimony.
Knyazev testified that in agreement with this Mr. H~ he gave
and carried out commissif)ns to organize, in the event of war, the
burning down of military stores, army provision bases and sanitary
centres. Knyazev confirmed that the Japanese intelligence service
emphatically stressed the necessity of organizing diversive acts by
employing bacteria on the outbreak of wa(for the purpose of infecting troop trains, and also army provision bases and sanitary
centres, with highly virulent bacilli.
These are two of the mo.st characteristic facts which in themselves prove the infinite depths of degradation, the real moral
depravity to whkh the minor and major pa:rticipants in this antiSoviet Trotskyite centre have sunk. The episode at the Kemerovo
plant and the instruction which Knyazev received from H-- in
the event of war to infect the Red Army men with highly virulent
bacilli-'-these two facts are sufficient to enable us to regard
the charge of high treason presented here as ibeing ahsolutely
proved.
The criminals acted insolently and cynically. They were influenced to some extent by the positions they occupied, which
caused them to think that they had so effectively secreted and
camouflaged themselves tha-t they would never be discovered. Indeed, how was it possible for them for a fairly long time to commit
these crimes with impunity? This is a legitimate· question, of
course. But what if those very consuls whose duty it is to safeguard the state from damage (the old Roman formula which states
that it is the duty of the consuls to safeguard the state from all
damage) if these very consuls proved to be the principal wreckers, the principal organizers of these crimes! Under these circumstances it is possible to carry on wrecking activities for a
month, for a year, for two years, five years, perhaps even for a
whole decade, if one plays this most despicable game of duplicity,
if one leads a double life, as lhe accuse<V in this case played and
lived. Yes, these crimes were possible because they were com504

mitted under protection of those who should have been the first to
sound the alarm, to give the signal, and to wage a ruthless struggle
against such crimes. This explains everything.
But here I want to raii.se another question. Notwithstanding
the fact that spies and intelligence service agents like Rataichak
and traitors like Livshitz or Pyatakov wormed their way into
lea.ding positions--nolwithstanding aH this, how was it that their
efforts to undermine the power of our industry, to enfeeble the
defence in-dustry, to shake the defence capacity of our country.
proved futile? This is the most important question, and it demands a precise and exhaustive reply.
Yes, for a certain period, at a certain moment, in certain
sections of our industry things were tight. But notwithstanding
all the wrecking and diver.sive blows that were delivered
against us, our industry and our railway transport have always
been on the upgrade, steadily rising to new levels. I will quote a
few figures relating to a few branches of industry which served
as the arena of the criminal activities of the Trotskyite plotters.
In the coal industry, coal output increased as follows:
Donbas: from 25,288,000 tons in 1913 to 75,202,000 tons in
1936.

Kuzbas: from 799,000 tons in 1913 to 17,259,000 tons in 1936.
~Ioscow Basin: from 300,000 tons to 7 ,201,000 tons in 1936.
An enormous increase!
In nineteen years our country created a powerful chemical
industry, and now 00C1.Ipies third place, and in some \branches,
sec-0nd plaoe, in the world ohemical industry.
At the beginning of the First Five-Year Plan our country had
been enriched by the creation of a number of new branches of industry of national economic importance, such as the aniline dye industry, the coke-benzol industry, the chemical and pharmaceutical
industry, etc. The First and Second Five-Year Plans of the Soviet
chemical industry were most striking stages in the development
of the industry. We must bear in mind that the history of the
world chemical industry in general dates from the end of the
18th century. Consequently, the modern worild chemical industry
had about 15-0 years osf development. But ourr Soviet chemiCal industry has had ten years of development. And during these
ten years it ha!? travelled the· distance that it took world capitalist
economy 150 years to travel. We have achieved successes which
have brought us in the production of sulphuric acid and soda to
third place in world output, only Germany and the United States
being ahead of us. In super-phosphates, we occupy first place after
the United States; in nitrate fertilizers our country is moving up to
fourth place in world output. These facts are very significant, par505

ticularly in the light of the monstrous crimes we heard about here,
and which have roused universal indignation throughout our country. This shows the way our· people, our socialist industry, are
.replying to the undermining work of the traitors and agents of the
fascist intelligence services. In spite of wrecking activities, in spite
-0f diversions, in spite of the loss of scores and scores of the best
Stakhanovites, who were done to death by the spies and diversionists, in spite of their systematic and deliberate sabotage of . the
. Stakhanov movement-our industry is growing at a tremendous
rate and is overfolfilling its produ:ction plans.
·
The pooition 'On the railways is similar. Here, we have enormous increase in railway traffic, whioh is eloquently proved by
the figures of average daily car-loadings. In 1934 average daily
loadings were 55,417 cars, and in 1935--6~,098 cars. In 1936 the
average was 86,160 cars per day! The annual total freight carried,
ealculated in billions ton-kilometres for the corresponding years is
as follows: 205, 258, 323 ! The railways have heroically overcome
their past difficulties.
How is this miracle, how is this phenomenon to be explained?
Miracles do not happ€n. \Vhy then have we such a remarkable
.increase? \V~y are our i!i-<lustries and railways flourishing like
this? Because on the side of the wreckers there are only individuals. The damage caused by these individuals is quickly repaired
by millions. Because on the side of the Soviet government and
the building of socialism stand millions.
The materials of the preliminary investigation and of this
trial, as well as the .confessions of the accuS>e>d Rataichak, Knyazev,
Pushin, Turok, Hrasche, Shestov and Stroilov have es.tab'lished that,
in addition to diversive and wrecking activities, the Trotskyite antiSoviet centre widely and systematically engaged in espionage on
behalf of foreign intelligence services. I will not dwell on this
point in detail. I will only deal with the main points. Connections with the Japanese and Gennan intelligence services were not
estab1ished on the personal initiative of a Tu:rok or a Shestov.
These connections were established in pursuance of Trotsky's
directives. By their espionage work, the people who under the
direction of Trotsky and Pyatakov estaib:1ished connections with
the German and Japanese intelligence services, strove to achieve
re:mlts which would have ·very gravely aff.ected the interests, not
-0nly of our state, tbut also the interests of a number of ·states which,
with us, <les.ire pea!Ce, and which, with us, are fighting for peace.
In his message to the Central Committee of the Communist
.Party of Spain addressed _to Comrade Jose Diaz, Comrade Stalin
'Said: "The toilers of the Soviet Union are merely fulfilling their
-Outy in giving all the assistance they can to the revolutionary
506

masses of Spain. They," said Comrade Stalin, "fully realize that
the liberation of Spain from the yoke of lhe fascist reactionaries
is not the private affair of the Spaniards, but the common cause
of the whole of advanced and progressive humanity." Comrade
Judges, I as'k you too, in weighing all the ckcurnstances of the
present caise and in appraising the significance of the crimes com.milted by the accused, to approach the matter from the point of
view ()f the protection of the interests of our state, from the point
of view of the protection of the interests of the whole of advanced
and progressive humanity.
We are keenly interested that the government of every country
which desires peace, and is fighting for peace, should take the most
determined measures, to put a stop to every attempt at criminal,
espionage, diversive, terrorist activities organized by the enemies
of peace, by the enemies of democracy, by the dm·k fascist forces
which are preparing for war, which are preparing to wreck tlie
cau.se of peace, and consequently, the cause of the whole of ad~an~, the whole olf progressive· humanity. It has been fairly
fully established precisely what was done in this sphere by the
minor spies sitting in the dock here, such as Hrnsche and Rataichak,
and by the major spies who heaid this group. Knyazev, Livshitz,
Rataichak, Shestov, Stroilav, Pushin and Hrasche are direct agents
of the German and Japanese intelligence s.erviices. The fact that
they -are agents d~ not, of course, preclude, but, on the contrary,
presumes that the chiefs of this centre who organized the agencies and set them to work bear equal responsibility with the
rest.
The indictment charges the members of the Trotskyite centre
and their acOOII11pHces with organizing terrorist ads.
Here I must first of all deal with the main and general question. It has been proved that the program of the Trotskyite antiSoviet centre included terrorism, and that this terrorism was
carried into effe.ct.
We are in possession of documents proving that Trotsky, at
lea.st twice, and, ID().Teover, in a fairly open and undisguised form,
gave a line for terrorism, documents which t!hcir author has pro-.
claimed urbi et orbi. I refer,_firstly, to that letter of 1932, in which
Trotsky issued his treacherous and shameful call "Remove Stalin,"
and secondly, to a later document, the Trotskyite Bulletin of the
Opposition, Nos. 36-37, of October 1933, in which we find a nurnl;ler of direct references to terrorism as a method of fighting the
Soviet government.
Indeed, in a pro.grammabic article which beneath its official
.title carries the sulbtitle: "Problems of the Fourth International,"
Trotsky speaks quite frankly about terrorism as a methad which
507

already in those years w2.s put on the agenda of the practiyal activities of the Trotskyites. To our great grief they succeeded in
erriploying this terrexrism in· 1934-, when they- kmed Sergei Mironovich Kirov.
In that programmatic article there is a section in which the
question is asked: "Can the bureaucracy be removed by peaceful
methods?" Trotsky and lhe Trotsikyites regard our Soviet apparatus as ai bureau~mtic apparatus. In this chapter it is stated: ·
. "Take the iJini}ortant question of how to proceed to reorganize
the Soviet state."
Trotsky, you see, is concerned about the reorganization o:f the
Soviet state and, as we have seen d\lring this trial, so also were
his immediate ooadjutons Pyata:kov, Sokolnikov, Radek, Sere'bryakov and otlhers.
.
How to proceed to the reorganization of the Soviet state? Can
this problem be solved by peaceful means? An absolutely clear
presentation of the probl1:'m! An opponent of terrorism, an opponent of violence, shouid have said: Yes, peaceful means are possible on the brusis, say, of the constitution.
But what do Trotsky and the TrotS1kyites say?
They say:
"It would be childish lo think that the Sta:lin bureaucracy can
be removed by means of a Party or Soviet congress. Normal, constitutiol113.l means are no longer available for the removal of the
ruling clique." (This is what they slanderously call our government.)
"TI1ey can be compelled to hand over power lo the proletarian
vanguard" (they speak of themselves as a vanguard and evidently
have in mind a "vanguard" like these gentlemen who enga·ged in
murder, diversion and! esipionage) "only by force."
And the word "for-ce," as one can see, is printed in bold type.
A clear presentation of the question! Pea.cci.u[ means? Peac·2'ful
means are impotent. The only moons is force, and by fo:rc.e must
they be removed. But we iknow how force removes, particµlarly
when this force is left in the hands of a "vanguard" like the gentlemen sitting over there.
Then they go on frankly to speak aibout the "Stalin apparatus."
They say that if, nevertheless, this apparatus, our state apparatus, resists, then it will be necessary to take special measures
against it.
What I have quoted-I cannot quote more of it because of the
feeling of political revulsion that overcomes me-very distinctly
shows how th~ Troitskyiles in their sheets present the question .of
fighting ·methods, shows Trotsky's line in regar-d to this so-called
<Creorganization" of the Soviet state. Incidentally, in regard to this
508

Bulletin of the Trolskyite opposition, Pyatakov told us that Trotsky had said. to him: "Do not take everything we say in the Bulletin at its face Yalue. Bear in mind that we cannot say in the
Bulletin all that we say to you, and demand of you. Understand
that sometimes, perhaps, in the Bulletin we shall say things which
are the opposite of what we demand of you." And if under these
circumstances they say what I have just quoted, what else can it
be called if not a direct call for violent action against our state,
against O'llr leaders? \\'ihat else can it be called if not a direct call
for terrorism? I cannot call it anything else.
And this is f!he most objeohlve proof of the fact that when
-some of them, Pyatakov, Radek and other members of this criminal gang, said fuat t!hey had organized terrorist acts on the direct
,instructions of Trotsky, they were oompelled to say what was
:actually true; and no clhatter, no slander, no insinuations and no
.Trotskyite lying can oihsioore th.is fact! We are in pussession of
documents which objectively prove that terrorism is part of the
activities of the Trotskyite organization, that terrorism was proposed by Trotsky and that it was aecepted by Pyatakov.
In front of us '.Sit terr:ori:sts who not only organized terrorist acts
on their own accord, but also organized them in agreement with
the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc with whom they were competing to
a certain extent. Look: the published reicoros of the trial otf the
. united Zinovievite-Trotskyite cenfre show that the Zinovievites
were spurred on by the fear that the Trotskyites might "get ahead
of them" in their criminal activity. Hav•e we not heard the same
fuing at this triaJl? Did not the Trot$>kyites of the "para:llel" centre
consider it to be their duty, as Radek admitted here, to hold the
Zinovievites in hand, not to permit the Zinovievites to push them
out of puwer when they were distrirbuting portfolios? In their sleep
this "vanguard" dreamed of portfolios. Rad€1k wras to get the portfolio of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Rataichak, probably,
was. to be Minister of Public Worship, because he testified that to
this <lay he !feels bound by the vow he took before someone, somewhere. And Pyatakov was intended (we know that this is so) for
the post of Minister of War, and generally, Commander-in-Chief
of all the armed land forces (they had no naval forces) andI have in tnind the "old flyer" Rataichak-air forces.
The centre organized a network of terrorist groups. Pyatakov
had L<>ginov, Golubenko and others. Radek had Pdgozhin and
others. Sokolnikov had Zaks-Gladnyev, Tivel and others. Serebryakov had his own .group--Mdivani. Drobnis had someone by the
name of Po<lolskaya, who was also preparing a terrorist ad. Drobnis hfd his own group. As for Muralov-it is neediless to speak
about him. He is an ex-commander-how can he be without an
509

army? If. he cannot command Soviet forces, why can't he command anti-Sovfot forces? He is a "soldier," and he will command
whatever fore.es he is given and in the manner he is ordered. Eve!l
Shesfov had his own group--Arnold & Co., not a bad group, considering the tas;ks set before it. Not a very presentable group, it
is true, but practical in its ope.rations.
Pyatakov, throUJgh the medium of his Ukrainian representa·
lives, prepared for a terrorist ad against Comrades Poslyshev and
Kossior, and in 1935 against Comrade Stalin. We questioned Pyataikov aft:JO'llt this, we called Loginov as a witness, and he confirmed it. Ratlek trabed terrorist cadres in Leningrad; Zaks•Gladnyev and others, under the direction of Sokoln1kov, prepared for
a terrorist aot against Comrade StaUn. Mdivani, :under Serebryakov's direction, . prepared for a terrorist act against Comrade
Beria, collected terrorists who might be called to Moscow
for the purpose of ensuring the most successful acoomplishmerit
of so-caned .group terrorist acts. These also prepared for a terrorist
act agai_nst Comrade Ye?hov. Drdbnis also prepared for a terrorist act against Comrade Yez1hov. Muralo-v prepared an act
against people who visited Silberia, apart from the one against
Comrade Eiche, who lives there. Such is the line: to follow up,
to take ·advanfage ·of the visits of leaders· of the Party and
the government to outlying districts and to organize their assassination. And so Muralov, who Wlill under no eil"cumstances agree
to having the preparation of an attempt on the life of Comrade
-Orjonilcidze attributed to him, this very Muralov, firmly and
frankly (I cannot say "honestly" because this word is unsuitable
for affairs of this kind) admits that he did indeed organize a
terrorist aot against Comrade Molotov, the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of our Union. Muralov not only organ-·
·ized the terrorist act, but actually tried to carry it out through the
medium of Shestov and Arnold.
Of ·course, one may say: there were many groups, but they
have not much to show. But that is our good fortune! These gen-·
tlemen did not undertake to commit terrorist acts by their owr..
hand. That is our good fortune! We met Radek, Pyatakov and
Sokolnikov· fairly intimately, discussoo various questions with
them, believing that we were sitting next to comrades. But it transpired that our would-be assassins were sitting beside us: Had they
been able to advocate terrorism openly, the situation would, of
course, have been much more complicated. But they pursued different tactics, which were: not to T~veal the fact that the Trotskyites were preparing to· commit murder. The tactics they pursued
were to throw the blame, as far as possible, upon other people,
on Whiteguards, as they said. Under the circumstances,· it
510

was not easy, of course, .to find people who like the enlightened navigator Arnold, would agree to undertake to
commit such horrible crimes. Of course, Arnold, Shestov, Muralov, the West-Siberian centre, the Trotskyite centre &;s
whole,
must answer for the preparation of these acts, because this was
done on the general instructions, "concretely translated," as Pyatakov expressed it, "from the language of algebra into the 1anguage of arithmetic." But they fol"lgot abollll: fue existence of another language, the language of the Criminal Code, which knows
the crimes, knows the people who commit them, and knows the
penalty which the law inflicts for commiitting such crimes. They
choose Arnold as the suitable man to commit sucli a crime. Well,
what is it for Arnold to undertake to commit one or a score of
.terrorist a:ots? You have seen t:his Arnold. The Trotskyite conspiTators took all ATnold's qualities into account except one, that is~owardice. . ... He organiwd the attempt on the life of Comrade
Orjonikidze, and to our great good fortune, he frunked at the last
moment-and the attempt failed. He organized the attempt on the
life of the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars,
Comrade Molotov, but to our great good fortune, he funked again
-and the .attempt failed.
But the fact remaiins a fact. An attempt on the life of Comrade
Molotov was made. That the car overturned on the brink of the
15-rnetre "ditch," as Muralov here modestly called it, is a fact.
Take the murder of engineer Boyarshinov. \Vho was Boyarshinov? He was a man who at one time had been convicted for
wrecking. But that passed. Boyarshinov became an honest man.
He refused to construct the Rukhimovich mine according to
wrecking plans thlll<t were drawn up; and more than once he
protested against the work being delayed, and against Stroilov's
aiminal activity. He exposed Stroilov.
The honesty with which Boyarslhinov was working enraged the
diversionist gang. They organized his murder. On April 15, 1934,
engineer &yarshinov was driving from the railway station on
a horse-drawn cart. He was run into by a motor-truck, and crushed
to death. This is another example of the method employed by
the Sheslov-Cherepukhin gang which haJd in its ranks Arnoid,
and several other persons who were discovered, tried and convicted.
For example, Kazantsev, who had a hand in this affair. This is a
fact, it is not a self-denundation, it is a fact: Boyarshinov was
.murdered. This was the method that was employed in the attempt
to kill the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, Coonrade V. M. Molotov.
That is why the whole centre--from Arnold to Pyatakov and
from Pyatakov to Arnold-must answer fully and on all counts,

a

511

for these terrorist activities, for preparing to commit terrorist
er.imes. They are an equally and jointly responsible.
· I contend that the crimes enumerated in the indictment are
fully provep; the criminals also stand futilly convioted.
Our law demands that the Court shall appraise the proofs in
the case ·in accordance with its conviction arrived at after examinI'ng· all the circumstances of the case taken as a whole.
Article 320 of the Codie of Criminal Procedure of the R.S.F.S.R.
speaks of the necessity of submitting to the Court a number of
questions which it must decide in pas.Sing its verrlret. Of these
questions I think the most material and important are t~e first
two: the question whether the d~ds attributed! to fue accused were
actually committed; and secondly, whether these deeds are criminal within the meaning of the law. The Prosecution replies to
both these questions in the affirmative. Yes, the crimes attributed
to the accused were committed. The accused committed the deeds
.attributed to them, and these deedS are criminal within the full
meaning of the law. There cannot be the slightest doubt about.
lhese two questio·ns. But what proof have we in our arsenal from
the point of view of juridical procedure?
Jt must b~ S:aid that. tlJ.e 11_ature o( the pi:-esent case is suoh that
it predetermines the peculiar nature of the proof possible in the
case. We have a conspiracy, we have before us a group of people
who conspired to bring about a coup d'etat, who or:ganized themselves and for a number of years carried on, or secured the carrying
-0n, of activities directed towards ensuring rhe success of this conspiracy, a conspiracy with fairly wide ramifications, a conspiracy
which connected the conspirators with forei.gn fascist forces. How .
.can the question of proof be presented under these circumstances?
The question can be put' this way: a conspiracy, you say, but
where are the documents? You say there is a program, l>Ut where
is the program? Have these people a written program anywhere?
They only ta<lk about it.
You say there is an organization, that 1here is some sort of
a gang (they caH themselves a party), but where are their deci'>ions, where is the material evidence of their conspiratorial adivities--rules, minutes, a seal, and so on and so forth?
' I am bold enough to assert, in keeping with the fundamental
requirements of the science of criminal procedure, that in oases of
conspiracy such demands cannot be put. You oannot demand that
-cases of conspiracy, af coup d'etat be approached from the standpoint: give us minutes, decisions, membersih:ip oaros, the numbers_
.of your membership cards; you cannot demand that conspirators
bave their conspiratorial activities certified by a notary. No sensible man can put the question in this way in cases of state
512 .

conspiracy. In fact we have a number of documents to prove our
ca5e. But even if these documents were not available, we would
still consider it right io submit our indictment on the basis of the
testimony and evidence of the accused and witnesses and, if you
will. circumstantial evidence. In the present case I can quote a
brilliant authority on the law of evidence such as the oid, wellknown English jurist, William Wills, who in his book on. circumstantial evidence shows. how strong circumstanlial evidence can
be, and how, not infreqently, circumstantial evidence .can be much
more convincing than direct evidence.
I think that my esteemed opponents will agree with JI}e from
the point of view of the position they, as Counsel for Defence,
.are taking on this question. But we also have objective ·proof. I
spoke about a program and submitted to your attention, Comrade Judges, Trotsky'.? Bulletin, in which this very program is
printed. And identification will be much easier here than was
the case when you were esta'blishing the iderntity of certain
persons belonging to the German intelligence service from photographs .
. \Ve rely on a number of proofs whicJh in our han<ls may serve
as a test of the assertions of the indictment, of the theses of the
indictment. First, there is the historkal connection whicih confirms
the theses of the indictment on the basis of the Trotskyites' past
a.c.tivity. We also have in mind the testimony of the a-ecused, which
in itself represents enormous import:mce as proof. In the course
of the trial when one of the proofs was the evidence of the accused
themselves, we did not confine ourselves merely to the Court hearing the statements of the accused; we did aH we possibly could to
verify these statements. And I must say that we did this here with
all impartial conscientiousness,. and with all possible care.
In order to distinguish truth from falsehood in court, judicial
experience is, o.f course, sufficient; and every judge, every procurator, and every counsel for defence who has taken part in
scores of trials knows· when an accused is speaking the truth and
when he departs from tihe truth for some purpose or other. But
·let us assume that the testimony of the aocused cannot serve as
-convincing proof. In that case it is necessary to reply to certain
questions as the science of criminal procedure demands. If the
statements do not conform with the truth, it is what is caned in
science, a denunciation. And if it is a denunciation, the TeaSQns
for it must be explained. There may be different reasons for ft.
The existence of these reasons must be proved: It might be the
pursuit of personal advantage, personal interest, a desire to take
revenge on someone, and S'O forth. iJf the case now being heard is
approached from this point of view you will, in your ooil:ference
1

513

chamber, have to analy·se all the testimony and decide for your-~elves to what extent the confessions of the accused are convincing:

will

you
have to put to yourselves the q·uestion as to the -motives
which prompted this or that accused or witness. The circumstance$
cif, ihe present case, which have been examined here with
possihle care, convincingly confirm what the accused have said.
·There is no reason to assume that Pyatakov is not a member of
the centre, that R_adek was not present· at the diplomatic receptions and·did not speak with Mr. K--, or with Mr. H--or wiil1
any other gentleman-whatever his name may be; that he ancl
Bukharin did not treat certain persons who came to visit him unofficially ·to ''fried eggs and sausage," that Sokolnikov did not
speak .fo some representative or other, Urns '·putting a visa on
TrolSky~s .:mandate." All that they said about their activities has
been verified by the evidence of the experts, by tht> preliminary interrogation, by confessions and lesHmony, and none of this can be
subject to-any doubt whatever,
· I think- that all these circumstance·s enable me t-0 say that if
there is any shortcoming in the present (trial, it is not that the
accused have said what they have done, but that, after all, the
accused have not really told us all they have <lone, all the crimes
they have coinmitled against the Soviet state.
But, Comrn:de Judges, we had an examP'le of this in previous
trials and I ask you to 'bear this in mi:nd when we hear the fast
pleas t:hat will he made here in a few hours' time. I would like
to remind you of how, in the case of the united Trotskyite-Zinovi1~vite centre, say, certain of the <accused vowed, right hen~, in
this very dock, during their last pleas, some begging, others not
beggi·ng for clemency, that they had spo~en the whole truth, !hat
they had said everything, that in their hearts no opposition whatever remained against the working class, against our people,
against our country. And later, when the revolting skein of monstrous crimes committed by these people became more and more
unra\·elledi, \Ve found that at every step these people ha:d lied and
deceived when they already had one foot in the grave.
·If we ·are to speak o:f shortcomings of the present trial, I see
only one defect: I am conwnced that the accused have not said
half the truth which constitutes the horrible tale of the awful crimes
they committed against·our country, against our great motherlancU
. I accuse the people who are sifting here before us of having,
in 1933, on Trortsky's instructions, organized what they called a
""parallel" centre' consisting Of fthe accused in lhe present case
'?Yata~ov, Ra•dek, Sokolnikov and Serebryakov, but what was real1y ~he OJ>era.tlng active Tfots:kyite centre; that this ·centre, on
Trotsky\; instructions, through the medium of the accused Sokol~

all

51-t

· nikov and Radek, entered into communication with representatives of certain foreign states for the purpose of organizing
joint struggle against the Soviet Union; and that this centre undertook, in the event of its coming into power, to grant these sfates
a number of politicarl and economic privileges and territorial concessions; that this centre, through the medium of its member:;
and other members of the criminal Trotskyite organization, en-,
gaged in espionage on lfehalf of these states, supplying foreign
intelligence services with extremely important and extremely
secret materials of utmost state importance; 'that for th.e purpose of undermining the economic power !ind defence capacity of
our country this· centre and its accomplices organized and carried
out a number of diversive and wrecking acts which resuHed
in the loss of human life and caused consi·derable damage to our:
S1>viet state.
Of this I accuse the members of the "para<llel" a[lti-Soviet,
Trotskyile centre: Pya.takov, Radek, Sokolnikov and Serebryakov,
that is to say, of' crimes covered by Articles 5813 of the CriminalCode of the R.S.F.S.R., viz., treason to the country; 58 6 , viz.,
espionage; 58 8 , viz., terrorism; 589 , viz., diversion; 5811 , viz., form·ing secret criminal organizations. I accuse all the other ac·cused:
Livshitz, N. J\furalov, Drobnis, Boguslavsky, Knyazev, Rataichak,
Korkin, Shesto·v, StroHov, Turok, Hrasche, Pushin and Arnold, of
being guilty of. the same crimes as members of this organization,
hearing full and joint res·ponsibility for these crimes, irrespective
of the distinctive features of the criminal aetivities ·which characterize the crimes of each one of them, that is to say, of crimes
coyered ;by the same Artides of the Criminal Code.
Comrade Judges, thre principal charge that is made in the
present trial is that of treason to :the country. The penalty for
treason to the country is indicated in Article 58 1a of the Criminal
Code of the R.S.F.S.R. It describes treason to the country
as acts' committed to the damage of the military power of
the Union, of its state independence and its territorial inviolability, such as: espionage, disdosing military and state secrets
and desectiori to the enemy. All these elements, except the lastIlight abroad-are pres.ent in this case. On those who have.committed this grave slate crime, which ouT great Stalin Constitution
justly caUs the worst oif crimes, the law imposes the severest
penalty. The law demands that, in the event of the guilt· of the
criminals being proYed, they be sentenced to be shot,. permitting
·clemency only under extenuating circumstances.
Comrade Judges, in your conference e;hamber you will have
to reply lo the question-are there for these accused,. for each
one separately, individual and definite circumst·ances which would

a

5Hi

permit you to mitigate the penalty which the law holds out for
them? In my opinion there are no such extenuating circumstances. I accuse the defendants on- the basiS of the Articles of the
Criminal Code indicated in the indictment in their full scope.
.
I am riot the only accuser! Comrade Judges, l feel that by my
side here stand the victims of the crimes and of these criminals:
on crutches, maimed, half alive, and perhaps legless, like Comrade Nagovitsina, the switch-girl at Chusovskaya Station, who
appealed to me, through Pravda, today, and who, at 20 years
of age, lost both her "legs in averting a train disaster organized
by these people! I do not stand here alone! I feel that by my side
here stand the murdered and maimed victims of these frightful
crimes, demanding of me, as the State Prosecutor, that l press
the charge on all points!
I do not stand here alone! The victims may be in their graves;
but I feel that they are standing here beside me, pointing at the
dock, at you, accused, with their mutilated arms, which have
mouldered in the graves to which you sent thepi!
I am not the only accuser! I am joined in iny accusation by
the whole of our people! I accuse these heinous criminals who deserve only one punishment--<l.eath by shooting!
Tlze-.President: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*

*

*

Commandant: The Court is coming. Please rise.
The President: Accused Pyatakov, do you desire to avail your-.
self of your right to speak in your own defence?
Pyatakov: No, I waive it.
The President: Accused Radek?
Radek: No, I waive it.
The President: Accused Sokolnikov?
Sokolnikov: No.
The President: Accused Boguslavsky?
Boguslavsl.:y: No, I waive it.
The President: Accused Drobnis?
Drobnis: No.
The President: Accused Muralov?
Muralov: No, I waive it.
The President: Accused Norkin?
Norkin: No.
The President: Accused Shestov?
Shestov: No.
The President: Accused Stroilov?
Stroilov: No.
.
The President: Accused Livshitz?
Livshitz: No, I waive it.
516

The President: Comrade Braude, Counsel for Defence for ac·
· cused Knyazev, will now speak.
Braude: Comrade Judges, I will not conceal from you the exceptionally difficult, the unprecedentedly difficult position in which
the defence finds itself in this case. First of all, Comrade Judges, the
Counsel for Defence is a son of his country. He, too, is a citizen
of the great Soviet Union, and the great indignation, anger and
horror which is now. felt by the whole population of our
country, old and young, the feeling which the Procurator so strikingly expressed in his speech, cannot but be shared by Counsel.
. But, Comrade Judges, according to the Soviet law, according
to Stalin's Constitution, which ensures every accused person the
right to defence, irrespective of the gravity of his crime, we are
obliged, it is our professional duty, to help those of the accused who
have wished to avail themselves of this right, to exercise the right.
In this case, Comrade Judges, there is no dispute a:bout. t.he
facts. Comrade Procurr-ator was quite right when he said that from
all poirits of view, from the point oif view of the <locuments available in the case, from the point of view of the examination of the
witnesses who were summoned here, and the cross-examination of
the accused, all tills has deprived us of all pos.sibility of disputing
the evidence. All the facts have been proved, and in this sphere
the defence does not intend to enter into any controversy with the
Procurator. Nor can there be any controversy with the Procurator
concerning <the appraisal of the political and moral aspects of the
case. Here, too, the case is so clear, the political appraisal made
here by the Procurator is so clear, that the <lefence cannot but
wholly and entirely associate itself with that part of his speech.
While fully subscribing to the political and moral appraisal of
the case given by the Procurator, what does the defence regard its
task to be in this case? It is the task of the defence to seek for
what the Procurator spoke of at the end of his speech, to seek for
those considerations which would justify a plea for clemency.
Such is the task of Knyazev's defence counsel.
Where can the defence find such material? It can seek for it in
the appraisal, in the analysis of the personality of the accused,
to what extent he has become demoralized; has he become so
hopelessly socially dangerous that we see no gleam of hope for his
reformation?
·
· The defence might seeik for arguments in order to mitigate the
fate of the accused, also in the circumstances in which he was
drawn into the cminter-revolutionary organization. It is along
these two lines that the defence will try to fulfil its duty.
· I am defending Knyazev, chief of a railway, who, on behalf
of· the Japanese secret service, derailed trains carrying workers
517

and- Red Army men. I will not conceal from you that when I read
the material in the ca:se, when I_ perused the documents, when I
heard Knyazev's ev1denoe I thought I could hear the crash of the
wrecked cars and the .groans of the c:lying and injured Red Army
men. But I would be wrong if I said that there are no grounds -at
-ilU for his defence.
·
- The gravity of Knyazev's position is made still more grave by
the fact that he is a person who is almost physically, directly guilty
of _these wholesale, sanguinary murders and wrecking of trains.
Knyazev is not a politician of large calibre, he is not a theoretician
of counter-revo1ution, and to his sha-re fell the ibloody and sordid
work of execution. Hence, there is a certain psycho.logical dis•
t0rtion of the perspective. Hence we have a certain psychological
aberration as a consequence of which Knyazev seems to !he· the
pr1ncipal cuJlprit in the bloody deeds that were committed on
the Soutl1 Ura~s Railway. That is understandable. Such is
the ·psycholo.giical law. He who is closest ·to the concrete facts of
the crime, he who stands closest to the concrete crime, appears to
be most guilty. And yet the brain of this crime, the pFinci:pal mo·
live force of Knyazev's crime, is not within him, but outside of
him, in the "·oentre" and -0if course, primairily, in another force;
It is the one who 'created that disgusting phenomenon known as
Trotskyi-sm, the one who is betraying his country and organizing
terrorist acts; it is the one who estabJished contact with foreign
espionage organizations-it is the contemptible Trotsky. He is
the principal culprit in these disasters. And I .think that these
points must not be forgotten if we are·fo have a correct psycho·
logical perspective of Knyazev's position. Knyazev committed the
gravest -crimes, he was the immediate perpetrator of these crimes;
but notwithstanding the fact that, outwardly, these crimes seem to
be mainly connected with him, he is not the main culprit.·
And the second point to which I will draw your attention, Com"
rade Judges, are the methods by which Knyazev was drawn int6
the counter-revolutionary organization. Comrade Procurator has
already said that the Trotskyite organization never · had, . has
not, never will have, and we can be absolutely certain that it nevet
will have, the slightest mass basi'S. They were always gerieralS
without an army, a coterie of -conspirators; and one can under~
sfan-d w·hy. Is the idea of restoring capitaUsm with the ajd of
foreign interventionists, the organimtion of terrorist attempts on
t_he lives of the best people in our country, including the greatest
leader of the toilers of the whole world, Stalin; espionage and connection with secret services-are these ideas capable of drawing
even the least healthy human material into Hfeir organivations?
Of-course they were always isolated. They were with those armil->S
518 '

to which the Procurator referred, with one, two or three persons
at their command, and never could they count on gaining more.
That is why they tried to find recruits for <their organizations
by methods which were determined by their intimacy and oonnections with foreign espionage ocganizations. Common ideas, common aims and common tasks created the same methods of recruiting. These methods M"e blackmail, deceH and ·intimidation.
And it was precisely ·by these methods that Kuyazev was recruited
for the organization.
_
Comrade Judges, I have not the least intention of depicting
Xnyazev as a playthiillg in other people's hands, as- a victim in
the hands of higher counter-revolutionary organizations, as
blindly carrying out another's will. I fully understand thJi,t Kn,yazev
is a political'ly-conscious person, an ex-member of the Party, .a
man who occupied extremely responsible posts to which the P.arty
had appointed him. He admits foll Tesponsi!Dility, and :undoubtedly
he bears fuH responsibility for his deeds. But the ma._rmer jn whkh
he was induced to join the coll!Ilter-revolutionary organiiz-~tiqn is
characteristic and cannot but deserve your .attention. Knyazev has
not waged a war lasting for many years against the Party. as is the
case with-many of the accused who are in the dock \vith him. Compared with them he, strictly speaking, is a young Trotskyite. He js
distinguished for his undoubted instability, as was revealed here
<luring the trial when he told us a1bout his relations with Turok
and with the agents of the Japanese secret service.
Doubts arose in Knyazev's mind .as far back as 1930,, and .a man
appeared in the person.of accused Turok who at that time.was.opnnected with the Japanese secret service, w11o •at that ,fone was a
Trotsk.yite, who headed the Trotskyite organization on. the ·South
Urals Ra1lway, a man who was recruiting members ·fortheTTQtskyite organization and had managed to recruit several persons.for.its
criminal activities. And this Turok strove 1o take. a·dvantage of
Knyazev's waverings .and doubts in order :to recruit him fort t..1ie
Trotskyite organization. You remember, Comrade Judges, how Turok and Knyazev related the manner in which this took place? Several conYersations took place; according to Knyazev there were three.
Turok urged Knyazev to give his waverings organizationa.11 sh~pe and
to join the Trotsikyite organization. But in 1930 Knyazev c;it~ori­
cally refused: Evi.dently these waverings and doubts were· not so
serious as to cause him to give them organizational shape by joining the Trotskyite terrorist organization. ·But•something occurred
which placed a weapon in the hand of Turok, the agent oif the
Trotskyites and Japanese :secret service. It was the follo\ving. Jn
1930 several Japanese engineers wrrived in the.U.S.S.R. to render
lechnica.1 assistance on the Kazan Railway. Among these engineers
519

was a certain Mr. H - - who, instead- of honestly fulfilling his
duties, began to recruit an ()fficial of our state, with whom he came
into contact, for the Japanese secret service. By methods characteristic of representatives of foreign secret services-arranging social
evenings, inviting him to his lodgings, rendering him small services
and sending him letters which outwardly seemed quite innocent,
merely containing requests to send interesting literature, but which
in fact were a request to send information of an espionage character-he tried hard to draw Knyazev into espionage service on behalf
of his government. One day he bluntly and categorically rriade such
a demand to Knyazev. But Knyazev categorically and sharply refused, as he testified at the preliminary investigation and a:s he
told us her.e, and Mr. H - - was compelled to withdraw. Accused
Knyaze:v did not inform anybody of these circumstances.
·
Four years elapsed. We do not know how Knyazev behaved, a&
far as his Party wavering is concerned, during these four years'_
We know that he displayed no initiative in regard to joining the
Trotskyite organization. Perhaps the successes which he saw
achieved all around him caused these waverings to cease.
But one <lay Turok visits him again, after a lapse of four
years, when, perhaps, Klllyiarzev had already forgotten his •conversations with Mr. H--, and again makes his proposal to him.
It must be stated that accused Knyazev had .already commiitted a
grav·e crime against his country. For when Mr. H - - made that
spy's proposal to him a.nd withdrew after Knyazev's refusal,
KnyazeV' should immediately have informed the proper authorities
about the proposal made to him, and about the functions which Mrc
H--, who was officially sent here to render technical assistance
on our railways, was actually carrying out. But Knyazev did not
do -this. This was the first grave crime that Knyazev committed.
not only as a member of the Party, but as any ordinary citizen of
our country who is liable to criminal prosecution for failing to lay
such information before the authorities.
And when after these four years Turok again visited Knyazev
and again invited him to join the Trotskyite organization, Knyazev
again refused. Then Turok said to him: I know about the con-'
versatiori.s yo·u had with the Japanese .spy in 1930 and the proposals he made to you; if you do not join the Trotskyite organization
I will denounce you to the authorities as a concealed Trotskyite
and a spy, for you were in communication with Mr. H - - and
failed to inform the- authorities about it.
. .·Forced to the wall, Knyazev agreed to join the counter-revolutionary Trotskyite organization. The first paoge in the revolting
deeds perpetrated by Knyazev at the dictates o~' the Trotskyite ter·
ror_ist organization was opened.
520

Barely six months passed, and a stranger in a grey suit;
50 years of age, called on Knyazev at his office, in Chelyabinsk. The stranger asked for a private conversation with
him. Knyazev said he would have nothing to do with him.
Knyazev does not know his name. This stranger told him that
he had come to ·see him on behalf of Mr. H - - for the purpose of continuiillg the conversation he had had with him in 1930.
Knyazev tried to repel the unknown sharply, and fold him that
·.if he did not go away he would report him to the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs. But instead of submitting to Knyazev's command to go away, the stranger said to him: I know that
six months ago you joined the counter-revolutionary Trotskyite organization. If you do not agree immediately to the proposals of the
Japanese seoretservice I will report yO'l.l, and you wi'11 be prosecuted as a Trotskyite terrorist.
You see that both organizations used similar methods. The
Trotskyite organization employed the methods of the Japanese
secret service, and the Japanese secret service employed the methods of the Trotskyite organization. The unity of methods and
. of information is beyond doubt. Turok, who was simultaneously
a spy and a member of the terrorist Trotskyite organization, had
established close connection with the Japanese secret service for
supplying information. It is not known where the foreign espionage
agency ends and where the Trotskyite terrorist organization begins.
And, says Knyazev in his testimony, finding himself in this
hopeless position and fearing that he might.be really detected as
a Trotskyite, he agreed to work on behalf of the Japanese secret
service. So the next bloodstained pages of Knyazev's activities
begin to turn over, one after another: the horrible pages of raHway disasters, acts of diversion on the railways, passing information to the Japanese spies, etc., etc.
There were t~mes, according to Knyazev, soon after the visit
of the stranger, when he had doubts about the Trotskyite organization, which after all consisted of Russians, of Soviet citizens;
whether they could, along with agents of the Japanese espionage
organizati~ns, have proposed and sanctioned the wrecking of troop
trains, which the agents of the secret service demanded that he
should carry out.
Knyazev went to Livshitz," at that time Assistant People's Commissar of Railways and a member of the Trotskyite organization,
and expressed his doubts to him: "Tell me," he says, "what the
Trotskyite organization will say if I carry out the demands of the
Japanese secret service to disrupt our railways and to organize
train wrecking?" Livshitz {he did not deny it here) began to read
him a IOn:g lecture which was to serve as Knyazev's guiding star in
<45 to

521

his path of wrecking activitfos. He said that in the coming war the
Trotskyites would not only adopt a defeatist position, but would
fight arms in hand against the Land of Soviets; he said that in this
struggle all means were suitable, and "the worse things are, the
better."
.I will not enumerate all the hideous deeds which Knyazev committed, and which the State Pi:oseoutor so strikingly emphasized
in his speech. I will only say that I have tried truthfully to depict
the horrors Knyazev has perpetrated; but at the same time I wanted
to show that he is a peculiar man, that he did not join the terrorist
espionage organization on his own initiative, and that owing to his
pusillanimity and weakness of will he was, I would not say a yictim, but only a tool and was used as such.
I see another point which I could urge in mitigation of .his punishment. That is the full, really sincere confession of his guilt. As
is the custom .iJil judicial pradice, we regard such confessions as
same basis for taking a milder attitude towards an accu.sed, grave
as his crime may appear to be. Knyazev was sincere and truthful in
all his depositions. This is what he writes in the statement with
which the investigation material begins: "From the <lay of the
disclosure -0f.. the -T.rntskyite-Zinovievile organization to the day
of my arrest I was torn asunder by a painfull intel1llal struggle
in anticipation of the inevitable discovery and exposure of my
counter-revolutionary activ,ities. I will be ruthless with myself
and with all the members of the counter-revolutionary Trotskyite
organization who were operating on the railways on the instructions of the Trotskyite centre and the Japanese secret service. . . .
I do not expect nor do I ask for clemency. Casting aside all that.is
personal, I want to tell on:ly the honest truth, and utterly to expose
the whole of the criminal Trotskyite-Japanese undermining activilies."
His subsequent oonduct has shown that these are not mere
phrases, not an attempt to deceive the investigation -authorities
and the Court.' These are the words of a man who has. broken
with his past.
Comrade Judges, recall the conversation he .had with Livshitz.
Livshitz categorically denJ.ed this during the investigation, but he
had to admit it here in Court. Knyazev was really ruthless with
himself and others; he was truthful. This, to a certain degree,
helped the Court to investigate. this exceptionally frightful. case.
I.have already said, Comrade Judges, that Knyazev is not a leader ..
Iri this trial he ibelongs to the group of acou:sed which, perhaps,
did not fully · understand the -depths to which its leaders have
sunk. Knyazev .was one o.f the tools who '5aw all the horror of
522

their personal deeds, but harboured illusions about the aims, prospects and all the strivings of their "leaders."
·
Sow the veil has been torn down . . . . The confessions of the
leaders of the centre have revealed a picture of treachery, of
treason to their country and to the world proletariat, which before his arrest and the disclosure of the crimes Knyazev did ·not
fully realize.
The illusions have been destroyed. . . . Only the facts haw
remained in ail their naked horror. Instead of the pseudo-leaders
whom Knyazev followed, in the dock we find political bankrupts
and _traitors revealed in all their revolting nakedness. This terrible
.lesson cannot but repel even people like KI}yazev from the stench
of {;Ounter-revolution, notwithstanding the gravity of the crimes
they themselves have committed.
And this is the firm guarantee that Knyiazev, if the Court
deems it possiible to spare his life, will never again take the path
which led him to the abyss.
I think that Knyazev was sincere when, in concluding hi~
'>!atement, he wrote: "If the proletarian court deems it possible
in view of my sincere repentance to span~ my life, I will with
aH my force and by my tireless work .strive to expiate my· sin.
I want perseveringly and unceasingly to woTk for the- ibenefit of
my mighty country."
One wants to believe the sincerity of Knyazev's statement;
and this gives me the right to ask you to discuss the question of
the possibility of sparing Knyazev's life.
·

-The President: Member of the Collegium 9f Def~nce, Comrade
Kaznacheyev, Counsel for Defern:e for Arnold.
··
Ka:;nacheyev: Comrade Judges, monstrous was the picture
of treason :and treachery which was unfolded before you in th('
course of these few days. The guilt of the accused in the dock is
immeasurable in its gravity. The wrath of the people of th!±
Soviet Union is understandable. The essence of the work of ·the
Trotskyite organizations and the methods these organizations
used to enlist those who it would appear had no connection with
these organiz,ations in the past, have been exposed here in the
Court with utmost clarity and cogency. But the ·very fact ·of
being a member. of these organizations, inasmuch as the program of the organizations is perfectly dear, inasmuch as this
program leads back to capitalism, to the kulak-and it is not
known· where the limit lies--inasmuch as the path of these or-·
ganizations leads over the dead bodies of workers, over the dead
b<idies of the finest sons of our Soviet country-the mere fact ·of
being a member of these organizations is a most heinous cri_me.
:523

The facts of the c~se h:wc been estahlished not only by the confessions of the i1ccusl·d, hut ~lso hy the tremen·dous weight of the
evidence in your possession. Thr. scope of the contentions which
might be submitted to your atlrnlion, the amonnt of arguments
which· might be advanced as faclors extenuating the guilt of
.any of the a.ccuscd in this case is extrerndy circumscribed.
·
From the standpoint of appraisal of the position of each of
the accused in this case, it is only to be regretted that the man
who directed the activities of this organization from somewhere
beyond the frontiers of the Soviet Union has escaped this
dock.
A great distance separates !he accused Arnold from his neighbours in the dock and from Trotsky. Here we have a chain of many
links.
·
At ·a first glance it seems incomprehens<ilble how it could happen that Arnold, who properly speaking never had any political
orientation--{or one cannot speak of the political orientation of
a man who was at one and the same lime a member of a Masonic
lodge and a member of the Communist Party-should have bccoine a .confederate of people who try lo flaunt their past and
who have a solid record of political double-dea'l:ing over a long
period of years.
On the answer to this question, on .the answer to the question how Arnold happened fo become a rneinber of 1his organization, will depend the answer to the question which is most mo"
men to us for Arnold-that of the measure of penalty he should pay.
The question is put only thus-to lh·e or not to live. I dare to
assert that it was no mere chance, that it was no mere whim ·of
fate that Arnold found himself in this organization. We know
well enough, Comrade Judges, from the experience of a number of
trials, that the methods of recruiting members of wrecking and
all other organizations of ihis type are always identical. Shestov
recruited Arnold, being fully c-0gnizant of the type of human
material he had to deal with!
·
Remember Radek's words in the course of his testimony:
"historical or hysterical g:roups of professors" are of no use
whatever for the direct execution of terrorist acts. Therefore, in
his search for human material, Shest-0v adopted a somewhat different 1ine. And Shestov made no mistake. Comrade Prosecutor
quite rightly mentioned here that the leaders of this organization, while sending other people fo commit terrorist acts, never
themselves performed this "rough" work, and sought other people
as exccutants. This .is always the case in foreign intelligence ser"
vices and in counler-rcvolutiorla'ry ·groups of every other de~
scription, and here in this Trotskyite group loo they sought cxe524

eutants coming from suitable surroundings. Shestov here testified
as to the kind of people among whom this material is to be
sought. Recall how he recruited Cherepukhin, how he recruited
Stroilov, how he irecntlted Arnold. Shestov'-s testimony regarding
Cherepukhin is extremely eloquent: "I knew thait CherepukhJn
was a depraved man, greedy for money,"-there you have the
type of human material that is required for such affairs. And as a
suitable executant Shestov found-Arnold.
\Vho is Arnold, what is his po:litical orientation, and whom
did he serve? This question arouses doubts even in me, his Counsel
for Defence. We know that before he was nineteen years old
Arnold had a'lready changed his name four times, that before
he was nineteen years ol<l he had made two foreign voyages.
Later on, in the course of a very short spaoe of time, he served
in the tsarist arnny and in the American army, and :underwent
punishment both in Russia and in America.
Further, in order to form an opinion of his political orientation we must bear in mind his testimony to the _effect that, whilein America, he once served a sentence for some kind of talk
about the .Soviet government, while here, according to his questionnaire, he was punished for anti-Soviet propaganda. And underthese £onditions even I myself am unable to supply the proper
answer to the fil\St question-"Who he is? I am unable to furnish
a proper answer for that very reason that you, Comrade Judges,
in exercising justice cannot limit yourselves to the materials offered us by the aoc~used himse1f. If the court were to pass sentence only on the strength of the testimony of the accused themselves, justice, .properly speaking, could not be exerdsed. And we
do not possess exhaustive material regarding the personality of
Arnold.
At a first ~lance it may appear strange that I, Arnold's defending counsel, should admit these facts. But, Comrade Judges,
to pass something over in silenc-e is the wcrst method of defence.
Certain propositions may be analyzed or disputed, but passing
over obvious facts in- silence will not do.
The nationality of Arnold is likewise unknown. According to
certain data he is a Finn, according to others he is a Russian.
\Vhat induced Arnold in the past to make such varying statements in. his biographies we do not know exactly. "I wrote many
biograrhies_ I filled out many questionnaires, and I cannot now
recall what I wrote in them"-he himself says. If the accused
cannot remember certain facts about himself, it is not for me to
resort to guesswork. Permit me therefore in this case not to dwell
on questions which cannot be answered owing to the absence of
the necessary fadual information, hut to proceed to the questions
.525

which can be nnswcred on the basis of material we possess in
sufllcient quantity.
Comrade Judges, what did the part played by Arnold in the
organization amount to, and how did he get into this organization? On this subject we have not only the testimony of the ac,
cused Arnold hut also a number of objective facts which go to
confirm Arnold's testimony.
_
.
.
In the course of his testimony Shestov cynically related how
-h~, went about drawing Arnold into the organization. He said:
"[ fed him gradually. I illegally placed him on the list for Insnab
supply; I gave hiim irna:terial aid and assisted his family. I found
out about his unsavory past and threatened him." And it was under the. influence of these threats that Arnold joined the organiza t.ion..
·
Arnold states: "I was forced to agree to Shestov's proposal to.
join tih-e Trotskyite organization. A situation .arose when in the
.end he held me completely in hand." Even when Arnold had al.rea;dy been ['ecruited, the commission to execute a terrorist act
was not given to him immediately. After he was recruite·d a long
time . was spent breaking him in. This circumstance is also.
borne out by Shestov's testimony and by other objective material of the case. Finally, 'vhen Cherepukhin already gave
Arnold the direct commission, in the execution of which
Arnold himself was to risk his own. life, there followed real threats.
And without inducements of an ideological or other character;
wlho would· take such a risk? Here, undoubtedly, real threats
were used, and it seems to me that there are no grounds for
disbelieving Arnold's testimony in this case, that at the moment of accepting this loathsome commission, Cherepukhin made
it cl~ar to him that if he refused he would be annihilated and
that vengeance would he wreaked noit only on himself but als!J
on his fa·mily! I of course undel'stand, and have no intention of
denying, that this compulsion does not exculpate Arnold in any
way; but this circumstance to a very large extent explains his
connection with the Trotskyites and why and how he got into
that. organization. And to exphin means to understand by what
the criminal was guided. This will of course be appraised suitably when the sentence is being determined.
The next question is-how Arnold fulfilled the assignment
he had received from Shestov and Cherepukhin. Shestov says that
when this assignment was .given Arnold was called upO<Il to sacrifioe himself: and Arno.Id firmly promised to sacrifice him.self. But
as a matter. of .fact, as we know from the material of the case,
and as was quite.I rightly ~ciinted out by Comrade Vyshinsk~?
thanks to. Arn~ld·s cowardice, than1ks. to the fact that at this

moment perhaps the instinct of self-preservation came into play,
he funked it and did not dare to carry ont this monstrous commission. Thanks to this, the terrorist act was not carried out.
That is our good fortune, the good fortune of fhe Soviet people.
It is in Arnold's cowardice, in the facl that in both cases he tried
to deceive the Trotskyite organization, that we must largely look
for the reason why these abominable act•s were not oommitted !
In this connect~on it seems to me Arnold has testified sincerely, for
it is impossible to presume that he was guided by any other motives.
"I was frightened as never before in my life, . . . I did not want
to die or be crippled." There we have the motive which guided
him at that moment. And, finally, there is the fact that Arnold to a
large degree deceived the Trotskyite organization itself.
The question is inevHably bound to arise: after having received· this assignment, did Arnold make any altempt to get away
from this organiza:tion, to break with it? If such attempts were
really made, then they are of some weight in this case, and at
any rate should be taken into account when his fate ·is to be
decided. We know from the case that Arnold went to Tashkent,
went to Moscow, and broke with Cher~pukhin. \Ve know that this
is corroborated.
And so the fact that he attempted to break away from the
Trotskyite organization after the failure of the terrorist acts, a.nd
when he feared vengeance at the hands of Cherepukhin, must be
regarded as established.
However unRrepossessing a type accused Arnold may be,
it seems to me, Comrade Judges, that this Arnold, who began
life as a vagabond, was to a large degree the victim of that
tragic deception of which the accused Boguslavsky sp0ke here.
For if the members of the T.rotskyite organiiza'f:ion who are not
ordinary :ro.nk-and-file members, if people who for many years
occupied prominent positions in that organization, people who
for many years fought in the lea<ling circles of this oirganization against the Party and the government-if such people declare here in court that they were the victims of Trotsky's tragic
deception, then those people who had formerly never been connected with the Trotskyite organization and were drawn into it
have a still greater right lo deelaTe hllat they were the victims of
grave and loathsome deceit. ·It seems to me that Arnold was one
of such vfotirins of the tragic deception of the Trotskyite generals.
This to a large extent should be taken into consideration.
The accused Knyazev interjected in reference to Arnold: "Arnold is a rare masterpiece. You will find only one man like
him in ten million!" ~his interjeotion, Comrade Judges, simply
amazed me. The statement thaJt only one such man .can be found
627

among so large a numiber of people applies much more fittingly
.to the author of this statem.ent.
I must say frankly that, whatever our opinion of Arnold's
·conduct may he, such a statement f.r.om one man in the <lock to
another sitting by his side produces a strange impression under
the present circumstances, an impression, I would say, not fay.
oura:ble for the man who uttered it.
And if lhe accused Knyazev on this occasion suddenly expedenced wme strange fastidiousness, one is entitled to ask why a
·similar fastidiousnesS was not manifested w.hen -such Arnolds
were sought for, when such Arnolds were intrusted with such
abominable terrorist commissions?
Comrade Judges, these in brief are the considerations which
I wanted to ·s'Ulbmit to your attention.
The incriminating aspect of the case is sufficiently ·clear to
enable us to p~ace the various figures in the dock in proper perspective. But it appears to me that among all members of the
Trotsky.He organization, both in this dock and not in this dock,
the accused Arnold is one of the most insignificant and belongs to
the category of those who could only have been executants in this
organization and could have played uo other part.
The perioa during which he belonged to this organization also
tends to put him into the background. And the final consideration
I would like to submit is thait the accused Arnold really did want
to break away from this organization which he had entered under compulsion. \Ve know from experience that ~ numbei: of other
members of the Trotskyite -organization, fa:r more prominent members, have freqm~ntly made false declarations about such with~
drawals, and that these declarations were actually not carried
into effect. Such declarations in their case served to mask
their continuation of the aborillnahJe Trotskyite work. In Arnold's
case it was different.
From his testimony alone we know that while still a young man
in America he received his first political lesson while in the military
service. He stated that when he engaged in. some talk about
the Soviet country, this talk was immediately stopped and he
himself was arrested. We cannot fully check this statement, but
we must give credence to something else, namely, that in the
armies of capitalist states, Comrade Judges, you are not patted
on the hea·d for talk af this kind. And o.f course he could not
have lea:rne<l any other political lesson there.
And if you consider Arnold's long life, his long wanderings
various countries of the world, which, to speak the truth, it
l.s -difficult to confine within the frainework of customary testimony and customary questionnaires, we are nevertheless oibliged

in-

528

to admit that he never received a proper political training, and
that his last political lesson he has received at this trial.
Comrade Judges, permit me to hope that, when, on retiring
you come to discuss the fate of Arnold, to discu~s whether Arnold
is to live or not to live, you will bear all these circumstances in
mind, and that the political lesson he learned at this trial will not
be the last in Arnold's life.
That, Comrade Judges, is my request.

The President: The Court is adjourned till 11 o'clock tomorrow
morning.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:
A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, JANUARY 29, 1937, 11.00 A.M.

Commandant: The Court is coming, please rise.
The President: The session is resumed.
Accused Turok, inasmuch as you have declined counsel for
defence, you are entitled to a speech in defence. Do you desire to
avail yourself of the right?
Turok: No.
The President: Accused Rataichak, do you desire to avail yourself of your right -to make a speech in defence?
Rataichak: No, I waive it.
The President: Accused Hrasche?
Hrasche: I waive it.
The President: Accused Serebryakov?
Serebryakov: I waive it.
The President: Member of the Collegium of Defence, Kornmodov, Counsel for Defence for accused Pushin.
Komrnodov: Comrade ,Tudges, the struggle against the Soviet
power, as you know, began immediately after the arrivnl of this
power. Historically this is comprehensible; the deposed, crushed
and overthrown class of the bourgeoisie in all its ramifications
could not reconcile itself to the loss of its position. to the loss of
its privileges, of the possibility of exploiting, to the loss of its
wealth and so on. It tried to recover all this. The form of struggle
at that time was armed insurrection, the military campaigns of
tsarist generals supported and armed by foreign interventionists.
The struggle was severe and stubborn. The young Soviet Republic
literally shed its heartblood in its defence. The enemy was routed.
This was of great political consequence and of great practical consequence. The victory over an enemy armed to the teeth immedialelv extended the circle of friends of the Soviet Union and consider~bly narrowed the circle of its enemies: some fell, others fled
and others still-the most conscious-stricken and far-sightedcame over to the side of the Soviet Union. But the remnants of
the defeated enemy did not lay ·down their arms. They realized
that to resort to armed insurrection now would be absurd. They
began to await an opportunity and to seek new forms of struggle.
The opportunity arose. Exhausted, suffering, and wounded by the0530

imperialist war and the campaigns of the tsarist generals, Russia
was in a very grave state of economic disruption. The new government, the new republic was faced with a difficult task-to restore
the economic life of the country and to switch it over to the new
track. The difficulties appeared insuperable. It was the great
fortune of the Soviet Republic that a genius stood at its helm. The
seer Lenin realized that the country needed a breathing space,
and he intro~uced what is known as the New Economic Policy.
This policy was interpreted by the counter-revo1utionaries of all
shades and. colours as the surrender by the Bolsheviks of all their
key positioM; they adopted it gleefully and with great hopes-it
seemed to them that under the weight of historical difficulties the
Smiet power would collapse; if it could not be overthrown by
force of arms, it would fall beneath the weight of the difficulties
whieh faced it at that time, or would degenerate. Hence their
watchword-to implant, develop and reinforce the New Economic
Policy and to wait for favourable results.
·
But they miscalculated. A few years passed and the economy
of the country stood on its own feet, and the socialized sector
of the national economy began to wrest from the New Economic
Policy one branch of economy after another, first in industry and.
then in agriculture, and finally drove the New Economic Policy
out of its la.st refuge--the trading system of the country.
These victories once again considerably narrowed the circle
of enemies and extended the circle of friends. The most farsighted, the most honest ones realized that if the Soviet power
could not be overthrown by force of arms, if the national economy
had not collapsed beneath the weight of insuperably difficult
historical conditions, this meant that the roots of this power had
penetrated deep down into the life of the people. Butthe remnants
.of counter-revolution did not lay down their arms.
Towar<l!S the end of the liquidation of the New Economic Policy
there began those factional moves of the Trotskyite opposition of
which the State Prosecutor has spoken here. I must say that from
the very outset these actions of the Trotskyite opposition began
to serve as a rallying point for' all counter-revolutionary forces.
Counter-revolutionaries of all shades regarded Trotskyism not
only as a hope for the collapse of the Soviet power, but as a hope
for the complete restoration ·of capitalism in the form in which it
had existed before the revolution.
And the last stage of the struggle of the Trotskyite counterrevolution., the- stage that forms the subject of the present trial, has
very vividly confirmed the appraisal of the nature·'Of Trotskyism;
given by the counter-revolutionary elements.
_
- Many thought that the government would collapse as a result of
"53i

internal dissension within the Party. I remember that at the trial
of the Union Bureau of the Mensheviks, Sokolovsky, one of the
accused, described these two periods of struggle---:-the period of the
New Economic Policy and the p€riod of the Trotskyite actions-as
"vegetarian" periods, as opposed to the succeeding stage in the
struggle, in whieh the principal form was wrecking. The logical
development of the struggle against the Soviet power enables us
to understand why wrecking \Vas resorted to in the sphere of
national economy.
.
Every month, every day, the economic life of the country grew
stronger, wider andJ more profound. The enemies understood that
if they had not succeeded in overthrowing the power by force of
arms, if the economy of the country had not collapsed under the
weight of historical difficulties, then its development must be
restrained by artificial means and what had been created must be
destroyed. Hence the new directives and the new form of struggle
-wrecking.
Wrecking, a form ·of artificial destruction of the national
economy, undoubtedly caused great harm to the latter. It inflicted
severe wounds on many sections of the national economy, but the
organism was sound, and the wounds did not prove fatal.
This period embraces about three or four years, if one regards
the Shakhty trial as the beginning of this periodi and the trial of
the wreckers at the electric power stations, at the end of 1932 or
the beginning of 1933, as its end.
The end of this period of struggle, of this new stage in the
struggle, coincided with the success of collectivization in agriculture. Both the enemies and friends of the Soviet Union fully
realized that the collectivization of agriculture was not merely the
replacement of one system of land cultiivation by another. They all
fully realized that the collectivization of agriculture was altering
the whole order of life in the countryside. They fully understood
that age-old! prejudices were being eradicated, that traditions were
being broken, and that the incrustation, the mildew which had
accunmlated for centuries on illiterate and unwashed Russia, was
being swept away. Not only was the face of the earth being
changed, not only was the external aspectof the countryside being
changed, but the whole life, the whole psychology of the people
were being changed. That is why this front became the scene
of a bitter struggle waged by the enemies. The struggle assumed
:unusually cruel forms: terrorist acts against socially-active people,
village librarians, shock workers-against all those who were
sincerely and devotedly in favour of collectivization. Court trfals
r:fl<;d the searpiY. side of life and I recall many a trial in which the
\•1ctrms of terrorI.Sm were people who had sincerely and devotedly
532

worked in the cause of collectivization. Such are the historical
stages, including the last stage, of the struggle waged against the
Soviet power during these nineteen years.
\Vhat are the prmcipal and characteristic features of this struggle? I would say that there are three such features. First, that the
struggle against the Soviet power was not a mere conflict of tendencies or political shades. Comrade Vyshinsky was profoundly
right when he describe!;! the struggle as a struggle between two
systems. I wo'uld say that it was a struggle between lw<> epochs,
that it was a struggle between two world outlooks, and such it
remains to this day. This is the first characteristic feature, and
inasmuch as the most active defender of the former system of
productive relations in their worst aspect is now fascism, it is clear
why fascism has extended! a hand to Trotskyism and Trotokyism
to fascism, and why they have concluded an alliance for joint
exploitation, violence and slavery.
The second characteristic feature of this struggle is that every
succeeding period of it was more cynical and more shameless than
the preceding one. In this sense, the last stage of the struggle--!
hope that it really will be the last stage-was the most cynical and
most shameless. Here, as in a focal point, converged all the forms
of struggle which had spread in these nineteen years. Diversive
acts and wrecking, espionage and terrorist acts, agreements with
foreign interventionists and the partition of Russia are here .tied
into one knot.
And the third characteristic historical feature of this process
of struggle against the Soviet power is that with every year and
with every stage overcome, counter-revolution degenerated more
and more, faded, became ever more insignificant and petty, although ever more malicious and savage. All in any way honest and
far-sighted people abandoned counter-revolution.
In. the course of his testimony Pyatakov stated that Trotsky
in 1931 advised that the mass struggle should he discontinued.
This of course was not because he had no liking for it. On the
contrary, this. out-and-out demagogue wanted such a struggle. But
this required the masses, and the masses were not to be had. In
the course of the examination Comrade Vyshinsky asked Sokolnikov on whom they had expected to rely within the country in
their struggle against the Soviet power. On what forces? Sokol·nikov did not reply at once. Using the method of exclusion, he
began to discard the sections of the population upon whom it
would have been impossible for them to rely. And what happened'!
He excluded the whole working class, he excluded the whole
working peasantry, and I would add for my own part, :p.e would
have to exclude the whole working intelligentsia. What then re533

maii1ed? Sokolnikov reflected, and said: ·we placed our hopes on
the remnants of the routed .kulaks. This is what, after manv
years of struggle against the Soviet power·; ihe Trotskyite counte;revolutionaries came to; this was all they were left with. Comrade
Judges, they were left with the kulak remnants.
··
Meanwhile the young Soviet Republk was growing stronger,
"'i,dler an_d richer every year and became the powerful Soviet Union.
And I am profoundly convinced that the Soviet R\Opublic will
celebrate its twentieth anniversary as the strongest power in the
world.
And what about Stalin's leadership, against which this struggle
was directed? During these years it had succeeded in rallying
around itself the working population of 170 million. And among
these 170 million people tihere are no less than one hundred dlifferent nationalities. These 170 millions surround their leader with
a shield of love, res~ct and devotion which nobody will ever
pierce. Nobody and never.
I. have deliberately directed your attention to this historical
process of the struggle against the Soviet power. This historical
aspect is of great importance to me as a defence counsel in the
present trial.
·Our position must be understood!. It is no easy on·e. And :if
we, the defence counsel in this trial, ask you, Comrade Judges, to
depart in the case of one or other of the accused from the supreme
penalty which the State Pros-ecutor demanded, it is not for motives,
not for reasons lying in the character of the crime-here we are
completely disarmed-not for reasons which in the case of some
of the accused might lie in their personality-because political
duplicity obliterates personality no less than crime-but for reasons
that follow from the very strength, might and power of the Soviet
Union. And that is the main argument in our defence. To thL'i
niain argument of the defence I would add in the case of the
accused Pushin ·whom I am defending a number of considerations
that follow from the less important part he played in the organization of which he was a member. I could not agree to all the accused
being placed on the same footing.
If I were permitted, I would arrange the accused• in concentric
circles. In the centre stands Trotsky, supported by the worthy
son of his father-Sedov. The first circle consists of all those who
were directly connected with him by personal conversations or
correspondence. These are all the leaders of the parallel centre,
fhese a:re all thos.e who fashioned and refashioned the directives
that were re-ceived. The second circle consists of all those who were
diirectly conneeted with the first ciTcle/ iand who. were, I. would
say, the live vehicles of those directives which they· received from
·534

abroad or which were fashioned here. The third circle consists
(_~f all those who were connected with the people of the second
circle and wer.e the executors of. definite and concrete tasks. Pushin
belongs to this third circle.
During the examination here in court, Comrade Procurator put
Pushin a question, which was a question in defence. This does
honour to the impartiality of the State Prosecutor. He asked
Pushin: ''Did you know of the existence of the parallel. centre?"
A very profound and significant question from our standpoint,
from the .standpoint of the defence.
Pushin replied: "I did not." And this may be believed, because
he was not directly connected with any of the ringleaders. I would
~ay more: while on business matters he may have had connections
with Pyatakov, with the others he was probably not even ac<JUainted: Hence aU the directives that were issuedJ by the centre
~ere unknown to him, he was not aware of them. Yet as regards
responsibility-, he shares it in the same degree as the leaders and
organizers of the centre.
·
I do not know how Pushin, who joined the Trotskyite -organization at a comparatively late date, in 1934, and had no con~ec­
tions with it previously, would have met the directive regarding
the partition and sale of Russia. After all, one may be prepared
for grave and serious crimes and yet in one's _heart of hearts shrink
in horror from the latest proposals, from the _latest dirt>ctives
which Trotsky gave the centre.
Pyatakov and Radek said! that they were dismayed when .they
received this directive and wanted to summon a conference of
their friends to discuss it. Pushin was not fully informed ·of the
Trotskyite views reflected in the last directive of Trotsky on
defeatism and partition of Russia, and if he-although a wreckerhad been told of this directive, would not the sentiment of Soviet
patriotism of which Comrade Procurator .spoke have stirred within
him? Why, he was being called upon to hack to pieces his country,
his motherland, and; who knows, perhaps he would have started
hack in horror from the thought.
Do not overlook the fact, Comrade Judges, that in this.sea of
horrible villainies committed by the Trotskyite counter-revolutionaries, there is with respe~t to Pus]:iin one bright spot. He was
neither directly nor indirectly associated with that dfrective, the
mere mention of which chills our blood. I am referring to the
terrorist acts.
Yet as to responsibility h-e answer~ to the full. \Vhen he read
fue law with its severe sanctions, pomrade Procurator said that
in cases of extenuating circ:um,lStances the severe penalty which is
li85

naturally the normal penalty in cases of this kind, may be departed
from.
We, the defence coun5el in this case, must gather literally every
grain that may speak in favour of any of the accused and may
mitigate his Jot--every grain, because in their sum total these
grains may permit you, when you retire to consider your verdict,
without compromise to your judicial conscience, to depart from the
supreme penalty. And we must do this conscientiously, otherwise
you would! be entitled to rebuke us.
These grains in the case of Pushin in my opinion consist in the
fact that his relative importance in the Trotskyite organization was
insignificant. The facts of the case are clear. But I must say more.
Yesterday I once again read the Indictment. I read Pushin's
testimony, and I saw that everything that constitutes the subject
and essence of his guilt was told by himself on October 22, the day
of his arrest, a_nd moreover put down in every detail. To me this
is a very important fact. It is important because Pushin's file
begins with a letter he wrote with his own handl to Comrade
Yezhov. A few hours after his arrest he wrote a letter with his
own hand in which he stated that he would immediately, without
any hesitation, relate all that he knew of the Trotskyite organization and of its activities in the chemical industry. And he did relate
it, and moreover, with such detail that no doubt can remain of the
truthfulness, sincerity and frankness o.f his "testimony.
Comrades Judges, I understand the suspicion with which every
court official naturally regards the testimony of defendants. But,
after all, there is a sincerity of testimony which conquers suspicion,
and in this case this sincerity of testimony is accompanied by the
mention of even details, even trifles, all of which were checked by
the experts and found to be abso1utely true.
Permit me to remind you of one episode which shows that
many criminals have been remoulded in the great work of socialist construction. In this court the tragic case of engineer Boyarshinov was rec_ounted. I remember him very well. I can see him
now as he was during the Shakhty trial. He was a wrecker, a
man of no ordinary ability, who, although without a higher education, had occupied a ve:ry high post, chief engineer of the Donetz
Basin Coal Trust. He was at that time a wrecker. But you have
seen with what sincerily and h<mesty this former wrecker became
an excellent Soviet worker. During this trial I have read opinions
given about him by his colleagues at work, who with understandable horror spoke of the monstrous villainy that was committed in
Siberia when this one-time wrecker who had become an honest
worker was literally crushed to death by a motor truck at the
behest of Shestov, Cherepukhin and others.
536

Who knows, perhaps the letter written by Pushm with his own
hand in the first hours following ibis arrest, that testimony which
he gave at length and sincerely, were an echo of a change of heart
which had been evolving before that.
I will be bold enough to state that he had already given up
Trotskyite work in the autumn of 1935. Comrade Vyshinsky asked
him: perhaps the had given it up because he was not given any more
commissions? Be it so~ But he could have displayed initiative
himself, and he had the opportunity to do so. In July 1936 Pushin
visited the Kamenka Combinedl Wor-ks and there met Geid and
Bukoyevsky, people whom 'he had himself recruited for the Trotskyite organization. Could he not have given them wrecking instructions for wrecking work and diversive acts? But he endeavoured to avoid meeting them. I have checked up this testimony, and
I must say ~at ithiis version was not invented here in court, and! is
set forth in detail in his evidence of January 17, 1937. Just see with
what exactness this man gave his evidence, mentioning every trifle.
These trifles are important not from the standpoint of establishing
any of the facts of the case but because they are characteristic
of the sincerity and truthfulness of his testimony. Comrade
Procurator asked one of the experts in coort: "What difference is
there between the findings of the experts and the evidence given
by Tamm on the subject of the diversive act which was committed
in November 1935 at the Gorlovka Works." The expert said:
"Tamm says that four days before the explosion the regime laid
down in the regulations was violated, while we experts consider
that the regime was violated eleven days before the explosion."
Pushin rose up and said: "I request it to be verified that ID. my
testimony I said ten days." This perhaps is a trifle, but it should
be regarded not from the standpoint of its value as a fact (is it not
all the same, the explosion after all took place and he will have
to answer in any case for t!his diversive act), but from the standpoint that this trifle is characteristic of the sincerity and truthful~
ness of the testimony. I verified the statement which Pushin made
in Court and found that the record of his examination contains the
following testimony: " ... Tamm so arranged it that the check on
the presence of acetylene in the liquid oxygen of the condensers,
which _should have be€n dol).e several times in every shift, was
not done for ten days, which resulted in an explosion of great
viofonce." And here as on October 22, that is, the day of 'his arrest,
he was truthful in every detail of his testimony, Almost a year
elapsed between· November 1935 and the day of Ms arrest, and
during this year, neither with respect to wrecking nor with respect
to tran&mitting informatio'(l' will you find a single fact that could
incriminate him. This is also a point· in his· favour. True, as,
537

J have expressed it, it may be only one drop in an ocean of crime,

but this drop exists, and when you retire to consider yom: verdict,
it may, in conjunction with oiher factors, help -to save liis life. Comrade Judges, do not forget that at that time he was under
.the influence of a strong personality-Rataichak. During the testimony he gave here Rataichak said that he recruited various people for the organization by various -methods; and Pushin has
testified that the method which Rataichak used to recruit him was
continually to remind him of the good turn he had done him when
Pushin was being tried under Articles 109 and 111 of the Cr1minal
Code, and! of the fact that his advancement in his career was due
to Ra¥ikhak, and that Pushin was indebted to him. Who knows,
perhaps the fact that Pushin did not commit any crime in 1936
was due to the fact that he escaped from Rataichak's influence by
going to work on the construction of the Rion Combined Works.
In summing up everything ·that concerns Pushin, in addition
lo the main contention which I have mentioned, I ·must once more
emphasize the fact that he was not aware of the existence of the
parallel centre, and that he was not fully aware of the directives
being carried out by the centre. He had no share in the terrorist
acts, he ga:ve up -practical work in the Trotskyite organization at
the end of November 1935, he acted1 on the instructions of Ratai~
chak and he has now sincerely confessed and has told the whole
truth. I think that this combination of small but favourable features entitles me to request you to depart from the supreme penalty
which the State Prosecutor demanded in relation to Pushin, and
entitles you to meet my request.
Comrade Judges, my speech is drawing to an end. Liberty is
not something that can be exported or imported. Liberty is won
by the blood of the people. Andi having won it, the people will
not part with it. It. is, madness to think that the people of the
Soviet Union, having won real freedom in the October Revolution,
will surrender it to anybody voluntarily, even if that somebody is
aided by foreign intervention. Such an attempt was made but even
in 1919 it failed. \Vhoever thinks that it can succeed in 1937 has
lost his reason; whoever desires it has lo&t lhis conscience; a-nd whoever works for it has lost both reason and conscience.
The country is indignant, but it is calm. It is ca1min the knowledge of its strength and might: it is calm because those bloody
pa•ges which were written by the Trotskyite counter-revolutionaries
in the history of the struggle aigainst the Soviet power are. pages
()f the past, that have been turned over and they cannot by one
-iota prevent the Soviet Union from marching forward triumphantly
fo that bright and happy future which we all feel.
fi38 .

The President: Comrade Vyshinsky, do you wish to answer?
Vysilinsky: No. I do not.
The President: ¥le shall pass on to. the last pleas. Accused
Pyatakov.
Pyatakov: Citizen Judges, I have waived my right to a speech
in my defence because the state prosecution was correct in its establishment of ~he facts;_it was correct also in its estimation of my
crime. But I cannot agree, I cannot reconcile myself to one assertion
made by the State Prosecutor, namely that even now I remain a
Trotskyite. Yes, I was a Trotskyite fOT many years. I worked hand
in hand with the Trotskyites, but the sole motive, the only motive
that prompted me to make the statements that I have made, was
the desire, even now, even at too late a date, to ,get rid of my loathsome Trotskyite past.
And therefore I understand that my confession, my story of
the activities_:_..of the infamous counter-revolutionary, criminal
activities in which I and· my associates engaged, came too late in
point of time to have any prndical results for me personally.
But do not deprive me of the right to feel, only to feel that even
though too late I have nevertheless · shaken off this filth, this
vileness.
For the most painful thing for me, Citizen Judges, is not the
just sentence which you will pass. It is the realization; above· all
to myself, the realization at the investigation, the realfaation·before you and the whole country, that as a result of the· wl;lOle
preceding criminal underground struggle. I have landed in the very
heart, in the very centre of the counler-revolution--counter-revolution of the most vile, loathsome, fascist type, Trotskyite counter~
revolution.
It ""~ould be wrong to think that when my Trotskyite activities
began, I knew what all this would lead to. It would be wrong to
think-this does not in the slightest degree diminish my objective
criminal actions-but it would be wrong to think that I subjectively set myself counter-revolutio11ary aims and realized that we
would finally come to such a morass of infamy and crime.
Yes, I did once make an attempt to break with Trotskyism. That
was in 1928-30, and this attempt wa.s not carried through to completion. I did not shake off all the remnants of my past; there
remained a poisoned splinter of the remnants of Trotskyite ideas.
There remained a splinter which did not at first entail any great
practical consequences for me, but afterwards there grew ·up
around it that festering sore which brought me to the path of crime,
treachery and treason. This sore has been· lahced.
·Do not think, Citizen Judges-for though I. am a criminal I
·539

am also a man-that during these years, years spent in the suffocating underworld of Trotskyism, I did not see what was happening in the country. Do 'not think that I did not understand what
was being done in industry. I tell you frankly: at times, when
emerging from the Trotskyite underworld and engaging in .my
other practical work, I sometimes felt a kind of relief, and of
course, humanly speaking, this duality was not only a matter of
outward behaviour, but there was also duality within me.
· For I understoOd not only what was going on around me. I
saw-not that this in the least ·diminishes- the infamy of my
crimes nor their objective significance-I saw that we, the small
group of Trotskyites, as the State Prosecutor has truly said, were
the vanguard of fascist counter-revolution, that we could not
really alter by one jot the objective course of the development of
industry and economic life by our wrecking actions. But so it was.
And when towards the end of 1935 and in 1936 we came face to
face-or rather did not come face to face, for that is incorrect;
but found ourselve~ in the very thick of high treason, treachery
and the most barefaced fascist counter-revolution, when it was
clear even to us that we were turning into an agency of fascism,
then I was not the only one who had a desire to depart from this.
I did not find suffident courage nor sufficient firmness in myself
to take the only course that was open, namely the course of
voluntarily telling about my activities, of disclosing the organiza~
tion and disclosing everything I had done in the past-that is to
say, of doing this earlier than I actually did.
I was arrested. My arrest had a useful effect in the sense that I
gave full and exhaustive depositions about the activities of Trotskyism. But it had its effect only in the sense that whereas previously
I had tried, in a wrong way, to scramble somehow out of this pit,
my arrest confronted me with the choice of either remaining an
enemy to the last, of remaining an unregenerate, unconfessed Trot.:
skyite up to my last hour, or of taking the course which I have
taken.
.
I understand that this cannot serve as a motive for clemency.
I am merely explaining to the Court what it was which finally
prompted me to give those exhaustive statements which, I hope,
may have given some aid in unravelling this foul tangle.
I am not going to say, Citizen Judges-for it would be ridiculous to speak about this here-that of course no measures of
repression or suasion have been employed in regard to me. Indeed
such measures, for me personally at any rate, could not have
serv'ed as· a motive fo1• niaking statements.
·
·
It is not fear that has been my motive for recounting my crimes.
.What can be worse than the very consciousness and confession of

MO

all those crimes-the most grievous and noxious crimes, which it
fell to my lot ts> commit?
·
Any punishment which you may adjudge will be lighter than
the very fact of confession. That is why I could not reconcile
myself -to the assertion made by the State Prosecutor to the effect
that even now, ~n the dock, I have remained the Trotskyite that
I was.
And while not I alo_ne have been brought before the Soviet
Court, while I 'bear full criminal responsibility in accordance with
Soviet law before the Soviet Court for my crimes, while we are
answering in full measure for all our actions, the man for whose
sake we did this, at whose direct instructions and instigation we
have perpetrated all this, will not, I think-for I know him full
well-find any·other course than to dissociate himself from what
we have done together with him and under his leadership, to
slander us, to lie, to accuse us of cowardice and anything else he
may please.
Trotsky will not act otherwise. I know him too well to doubt
that. Instead of refuting me face to face here in court or hurling
at me the accusations which he will undoubtedly make, instead
of being confronted with us, it is of course easier, simpler, less
dangerous for him to continue his wrecking work.
Personally I am very little affected by this, Citizen Judges. I
only deeply regret that he, the main criminal, the unregenerate
and hardened offender, Trotsky, is not sitting beside us in the
dock.
I am too keenly conscious of my crime, and I do not venture
to ask you for clemency. I will not even make bold to ask for
mercy.
In a few hours you will pass your sentence. And here I stand
before you in filth, crushed by my own crimes, bereft of everything through my own fault, a man who has lost his Party, who
has no friends, who has lost 'his family, who has lost his very
self.
Do not deprive me of one thing, Citizen Judges. Do not deprive
me of the right to feel that in your eyes, too, I have found strength
in myself, albeit too late, to break with my criminal past.

The President: Accused Radek.
Radek: Citizen Judges, after I have confessed to the crime of
treason to the country there can be no ques1ion of a speech in defence. There are no arguments by which a grown man in full
possession of his senses could defend treason to his country. Neither
~ I plead extenuating circumstances. A man who has spent 35
years in the labour movement cannot extenuate his crime by any
541

circmrn;tances when he confosses to a crime of treason to lhe country. l cannot even plead that I was led to err from the true path by
Trotsky. 1 was already a grown man with fully-formed views when
I met Trotsky. And while in general Trotsky's part in the develop·ment of lhese counter-revolutionary organizations is tremendous;
:at the time I entered this path of struggle against the Party Trotsky's authority for me was minimal.
I joined the Trotskyite organization nof for the sake of Trotsky's
petty theories, the rottenness of which I realized at the time of my
first exile, and not because I recognized his authority as a leader,.
but because there was no other group upon which I could rely in
those political aims which I had set myself. I had been connected
with this group in the past, and therefore I went with this group.
I did not go because I was drawn into lh~ struggle, but as a result
of my own appraisal of the situation, as the result of a·path I had
voluntarily chosen. And for this I bear complete and sole responS··
ibility-a responsibility which you will measure according to the
letter of the law and according to your conscience as judges of
the Soviet Socialist Republic.
·
And with this I might conclude my last plea, if I did not consider it necessary to object to the view of the trial-as regards a
partial, not the main-, point~which was given here and which I
must reject, not from my own personal standpoint, but from a
political sta,i:idpqint. I hav~ admitted my guilt and I have given
full testimony concerning it, not from the simple necessity of re~
.pentance-repentance may be an internal state of mind which
one need not necessarily share with or reveal to anybody--not
from love of the truth in general-the troth is a very bitter one,
and I have already said that I woul~ prefer to have been shot
thrice rather than to have had to admit it-but I must admit my
guilt from motives of lhe general benefit that this truth must
bring. And wheri I heard that the people in this dock are mere
bandits and spies. I object to it. I .do not object to it with the
purpose of defending myself; because since 1 have confessed to
treason to the country, it makes little difference from my po.int of
view, from a human point of view that I committed treason. in
conspiracy with generals,: I have not J:hat professional pride which
pe.rmits one to commit treachery in conjunction with generals, but
not to commit treachery in conjunction with agents.
But the matter is this. This trial has revealed two important
facts. The intertwining of the counter-revolutionary organizations
w:ith all the counter-revolutionary forces in the country-1:hat is
'one fact. But this Jact is tremendous objective proof. \Vrecking
work can be established by technical experts; the terrorist activities
Were connected with so many people that the· testimony of th es(!
5~2

people, apart from material ·evidence, presents an absolute picture.
But the tria:l is bicentric, and it has another important significance.
It has revealed the smithy of war, and has shown that the Trotskyite organization became an agency of the forces which are fomenting a new world war.
.
\Vhat proofs are there in support of this fact? In support of
this fact there is the evidence of two people-the testimony of
myself, who received tl}e directives and the letters from Trotsky
(which, unforfonalely, I burned), and the testimony of Pyatakov,
who spoke to Trotsky. All the testimony of the other accused
rests on .our testimony. If you are dealing with mere criminals
and spies, on what can you base your conviction that what we
have said is the truth, the firm truth?
Naturally, the State Prosecutor and the Court, who know the
whole history of Trotskyism and who know us, have no reason to
suspect that we, bearing the burden of terrorism, added high treason just for our own pleasure. There is no necessity to convince you
of that. \Ve must convince, firstly, the diffused wandering Trotskyite elements in the country, who have not yet laid down
their arms, who are dangerous and who must realize that we speak
here shaken to the depths of our souls, and that we are speaking
the truth and only the truth. And we must also tell the world
that what Lenin-I tremble to mention his name from this
dock--said in the letter, in the directions he gave to the delegation that was about to leave for The Hague, ahout the secret of
war. A fragment of this secret was in the possession of the young
Serbian nationalist, Gabriel Pr.incip, who could die in a fortress
without· revealing it. He was a Serbian nationalist and felt the
justice of his cause when fighting for the secret which was keRt
by the Serbian national movement. I cannot conceal this secret and
carry it with me to the grave, because while in view of what I
have confessed here, I have not the right to speak as a repentant
Communist, nevertheless the 35 years I worked in the labour movement, despite all the errors and crimes with which they ended",
entitle me to ask you to believe one thing-that, after all, the
masses of the people with whom I marched do mean something
to me. And if I concealed this truth and departed this life with it,
as Kamenev did, as Zinoviev did and as Mrachkovsky did, then
when I thought over these· things, I wouild ·have heard in my
hour of death the execrations' of those people who will be slaughtered in the future war, and whom, by my testimony, I could· have
furnished with a weapon against the war that
being fomented".
And that is why I contest the assertion that· those who sit
here in th~s dock are crimiryals who. have lost all human shape.
lam fightmg not for my honour, wihlch I ·have losi; I am fightmg

is

54'3

for the recognition of the truth of the testimony I have gi_ven,
the truth in the eyes not of this Court, not of the Public Prosecutor and the judges, who know us -stripped- to. the soul, but
o.f the· far wider circle of people who have known me for thirty
years and who cannot understand how I have sunk so low. I
want them to see clearly from beginning to end why it was I
gave this testimony, and therefore, in spite of the fact that I have
already in part spoken of this, I feel obliged to present a picture
of the events and experiences of this latest period, especially from
·the time of receipt of the- last instructions from Trotsky.
I mrist explain why the decision taken in January to reveal
everything was not carried out, and I must explain why I could
not do that during the interrogation, why even when I arrived at
the People's Commissariat of Infernal Affairs I did not at once carry this decision into effect. The doubts of the State Prosecutor are
entirely legitimate. The external facts speak against the existence
of such a decision. And, moreover, the State Prosecutor, who is
aware of the fact that Ramenev preferred to die like a handil
without a politica-1 program, asks himself why it should be as
sumed that here we have complete sincerity, that the whole truth
has been told to the end.
Without the slightest egocentrism-my personality plays the
least parl here-I must first of all mention the personal factors
which made it easier for me to regard Trotsky's December directive
as the finale, as the end, as a signal of the necessity to break before
the others did and with greater internal conviction. These were personal factors. Some of rnly fellow-accused returned to the path of
struggle as oonvinced Trotskyites who permanently denied the
possibility of building up socialism in one country. I returned
having ceased to believe this conception of Trotsky's. I returned
because I shrank from the diffi.culties that confronted socialism
in 1931-33. This only shows that to admit the building of-socialism is easier theoretically than to possess the strength and firmness
which was fostered only in those who followed the Party from
profound internal oonviction and did not combat it. Without confidence in the leaders, or with insufficient confidence, without
sufficient con.tact with the cadres-'the 'theory itself was a dead
letter, it was a theoretical view and not a practical one. Here
I stumbled and I returned to this underground work. And here
I immediately became an object of deceit. I say this not in
order to extenuate my. guilt, but because I increased this deceit
tenfoLd in relation to our rank and file, and in order that you may
understand the perwri.al elements which helped me to realize the
necessity of a change of front.
\Vhen I joined the organization, Trotsky did not say a word
544

about the seizure of power in his letter. He felt that such an idea
would seem to me too reckless. He only seized upon my profound
perturbation and that in this state of mind I might decide to join
forces with him; and then everything would turn out as he wanted.
And when during my conversation with Pyatakov in December
1932, he said, "What are you thinking about, this is of course
a state conspiracy," this was the first rift from the very beginning.
.
In September 1933 Romm brought me a letter from Trotsky in
which wrecking work was spoken of as something taken for granted. And once again-and Romm spoke of this in his evidence--!
was dumbfounded. Why? Because when I held these conversations not a word was said about wrecking activity, and this was
done deliberately. They knew t'.hat a_fter the period of the fight
against wrecking, after its exposure in all its hideousness, I might
come to grief. And so it was concealed from me. And when Pyata·kov revealed these things to me, I of course realized that the door
had banged to. It was absurd to start to quarrel over this. But it
was the st>cond rift.
And, finally, after receiving Trotsky's directives in 1934~ I
sent him the reply of the centre, and added in my own name that
I agreed that the ground should be sounded, hut that he ~o.uld
not bind himself, because the situation might change. I suggested ·
'that the negotiations should be conducted by Putna, who had
connections with leading Japanese and German military circles.
And Trotsky replied: "We shall not bind ourseilv€8- without your
knowlroge, we shall .make no decisions." For a whole year he was
silent. And at the end of that year he confronted us with the accomplished fact of his a'grecment. You will U:DJ<ierstand that it
was not any virtue on my part that I rebelled against this. But
it is a fact for you to understand.
·
And what a picture did I see? The first st.age. Kirov had been
killed. The yeairs of terrorist preparation, the scores of wandering terrorist groups waiting for a chance to assassinate some leader
of the Party, and the consequences of the terrorism seemed to me
personally to be the sacrifice of hunian life without any political
advantage to ourselves. We could not bring to Moscow the leaders
and organizations we required for group terrorism-that showed
the state of forces of the· terrorist organizations. And on the
other hand; I stood near enough to the government and lo tbe
leading Party circles to know that not only the precautionary
tneasures of the ·Of'gans of ipublic security, but the masses of the
-people themselves had become so vigilant that· the idea that the
Soviet power could be cast to the ground by terrorism~ven
with the help of the most devoted and desperate terrorist groups"545

'vas utopiai1, that "\Ye might. sacrifice human life, but that this
would not overlhro>,; the Soviet power.
A second aspect of the mattei·. I peTceived that Trotsky himself had lost faith. The first variant was a concealed way of saying: "Well,· boys, try to overthrow the Soviet power ·by yourselves, without Hitler. What, you cannot? Try to seize power
yourselves. What, you cannot?" Trotsky himself already felt his
complete internal. impotence and staked on Hitler. The · stake
was now on Hitler. The old Trotskyites had held that it was impos-sible to build up socialism ·in one country, and that -it was therefore necessary to force the revolution i.n the West. Now they
were told that a revolution in the west was impossible, and so
destroy socialism in one country, destroy socialism in the U.S.S.R.
Yet nobody could help but see that socialism in our country had
been .built. .
·
·
The second aspect was defeat.
I know a little about military matters and I am able to judge
the international situation. And to me it was clear: 1934 was a
period when I, a man inclined to pessimism, considered defeat arid
ruin inevitable; but in 19~5 all the chances were in favour of a
victory for this country, and whoever before pretended to him.self
that he\vasa defeatist by necessity; in order to save what could be
saved, was now bound to say to himself: I am a traitor who is
hei1ping to subjuga1e the country-which 1is strong, growing and
progressing. For what purpose? So that Hitler might restore
capitalism in Russia.
All the Public Prosecutor said about the fact that not only
Trotsky's directives but all the work of the Trotskyites aimed at
the restoration of capitalism is incontrovertibly true. The directives themselves were directives for the complete restoration of
capitalism, and they did not drop from the skies: they were a summary of th~ fact that when people fire at the general staff o.f tlle
revolution, when people un~ermine the economy of the country,
they are undermining socialism and, '!'hat being so, 'flhey are work·
ing for capitailism.
And this is a fundamental truth, a truth of decisive importance
in forming a judgment of the Trotskyites as a social current, and
the prosecutor realizes fhis. On the other hand, it shows that with
this platform we could not even among our own followers reach
as many as one hundred or so. If the State Prosecutor admits this
-and he does admit it fully-and bears in mind that we did not
even summon the conference which we had decided to summon in
order fo ascertain that even our closest followers would not accept
such a stan<lpoint, it shows that the Trotskyites, this group of
criminal people "\vho are stained in the blood of one of. the leaders
546

of the revolution· and who have committed an untold number of
crimes, had nevertheless completely miscalculated when staking on
restoration.
\\·hen people enter a fight in blinkers and cannot see what
is in front of them, they are capable of performing, and do perform acts fraught with terrible consequences.
But when you, the judges, deliberate on each one of them in
particular-and you cap.not do otherwise-you cannot but bear
this in mind. ·
Comrade Judges.
The President: Accused Radek, not "Comrade Judges," but
Citizen Judges.
Radek: I beg your pardon, Citizen Judges. I must now tell
you about the backstage aspect of this conference we wanted to
summon. Serebryakov was quite right when he sai<l. that therewas no decision. The conference in fa<'t was summoned in order
to decide. Why did it not take place? Why did this conference not
take place, what was concealed behind fhe scenes of this conference, why did I not tell about tl1e December iI11structions and
about Pyatakov's meeting with Trotsky even to a man so close.to me as Bukharin, who knew about the contacts with representatives of West-European and Eastern powers?
I shail speak about this because it may later have a practfoal
significance and ·supply the answer to the question whether
something still remains U'illdisdosed. I think it does: that some-thing remains hidden both from us and from the authorities,.
and could be disclosed. It was already clear to me that it was nonsense to think that the t~rrorist organization would liquidate itself
of its own a-ocord. In this Trotskyite organization there werepe0ple of various kinds, people of various shades and, as it appeared, people who were directly connected with foreign intel-'
ligence services. I did not know this at the time. I had to admit thepossibility that somebody was prowling around us. And the moment
we allowed this secret to escai)e from the control of these four·
people, from that moment we should be absolutely powerless t().
control the situation.
I will return for a while to the name of Dreitzer. The State·
Prosecutor said that we would return to him, and I will return te
him in a connection which was not examined here.
\Vb.en Dreitzer failed to appear in Moscow for seven or eight
months, I might have thought that this was for conspiratorial
reasoru;, But when Dreitzei- failed to appear in January and, after
having received my summons to the conference, came to Moscow
and did not come to see me--he was in Moscow in 1935 and did'
not come to see me--it became clear to me that Trotsky, on

the 1asis of the correspondence I had had with him, and perceiving Pyatakov's resistance and our misgivi.ngs about t11e defeatist
line-:--was creating some other devilish business in addifion to
the parallel centre. I conclude this from the fact that Dreitzer
avoided us in 1935.
When I n:ad 1he record of the trial of the united centre I did
not find one fact which was unknown to me, which had taken
place without the knowledge of others. This meant that some
third organization wa:s operating.
And, finally, when Pyaitakov rel:'l.lined from aibroad; he casually remarke-d when speakiiig of the conversation with Trotsky that
Trotsky had told him that cadres of people wern being formed
who had not been corrupted by the StaiJ.in leadership. But when
I read about Olberg and asked others whether they had known of
the existence of Ol·berg, and none of them had heard about him,
it became clear to me tliat in addition to the oadres who had
passed through his school, Trotsky was organizing agents who had
passed through the school of German fascism. And I found a
direct reply to this when the question of the conference arose.
It was clear to me that if Dreitzer learnt that we were putting_
the question of Trotsky's 9-irectives on such a footing that it might
again lead to a split, as was the case in 1929, thep. before we
succeeded in doing so we should be put out of the way ourselves.
Not because Dreitzer bore us any ill-will, but because he was a
man who was thoroughly devoted to Trotsky and had closer
connections with him directly, than through us. I therefore could
not tell people about the conference. When we did tell them, the
arrests had begun and it was impossible to get them together.
Did I know before my arrest that it would all end in arrest?
How could I help knowing it when Tivel; the manager of my
bureau, was arrested, when Friedland, whom I had met very fre..:·
quently in recent years, was arrested? I will not mention other
names; I could mention dozens of people with whom I often met.
I could not then doubt for a- single moment but that this business
would end in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs. And
so I must ans,wer the question-why, instead of calling con~
ferences, did I not address myself to the Party, to the authorities,
and why if I did not do so before my arrest, did I not do it at
the time of my arrest?
. The answer to this question i~ a very simple- one. It is the following. I was one of the leaders of the organization. I knew that
Soviet justice was not a mincing machine, I know that there were
tieople of different _degrees of guilt among us, and that we--the
leadtrs~must answer for what we had done with our heads. But
l also knev,r that there was a large section of people whom we had

1>48

drawn into this struggle, who, I would say, did not know the
principal lines of the organization, and who wandered on blindly.
When I raised the question of a conference, what I wanted
was demarcation, I wanted to have separated out those who
wished to wage the fi,ght to the end-these might even be surrendered. bound hand and foot-and to rullow the others the opportunity to leave and o( their own accord announ<.:e their guilt
to the goverrurnent.
_
When I found myself in the People's Commissariat of Internal
Affairs, t'he chief examining official realized at once why I would
not talk. He said to me: "You are not a baby. Here you have fifteen
people testifying against you. You cannot get out olf it, and as a
sensible man you cannot think of doing so. If you do not want to
testify it can only be because you want t-0 gain time and look
it over more closely. Very well, study it." For two and a half
months I tormented the examining official. The question has been
raised here whether we were tormented while under investigation. I must say that it was not I who was tormented, but I
who tormented the examinin:g officials and compelled them to
perform a lot of useless work. For hvo and a half months I compelled the examining official, by interrogating me and by confronting me with the testimony of other accused, to open up all
the cards to me, so that I could see who had confessed, who had
not con.fessed, and what each had confessed.
This lasted for two and a half months. And one day the chief
examining official came to me and said: "You are now the last. Why
are you wasting time and temporizing? Why don't you say
what you have to say?" And I answered: "Yes, tomorrow I shall
be.gin my testimony." And the testimony I gave contains not a
single correction from first to last. I unfolded the whole picture
as I knew it, iand the investigation may have corrected one or
another personal mistake aibout the connections oif some person
with another, but I affirm that not a single thing I told the examining officials has been refuted and that nothing has been added.
I have to admit one other guilt. Having already confessed my
guilt and having disclosed the organization, I stubbornly refused
to testify with regar.d to Bukharin. I knew that Bukharin's pmition was just as hopeless as my own, becaiuse our guilt was the
same, if not juridically, then in essence: But we are close friends.
and intellectual friendship is s•tronger than any other kind of
friendShip. I knew that Bukharin was in just suc!h a state of profound disturbance as I was, and I was convinced that he would
give honest testimony to the Soviet authorities. I therefore did
not want to have him brought bound to the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs. I wanted to enable him too, like the rest of
549

our people, to lay down his arms. This explains why it was that
only towards the very end, when I saw that the trial was drawing
close, that I realized that I could not appear for trial having conceal1ed the existence of another terrorist organization.
·
And so, Citizen Judges, I will conclude my last plea with this.
We shall answer in accordance with tihe full severity of the Soviet
law, cons·idering :that whatever your verdict may be it will be a
just one. But we \Vant to meet it like conscious people. We know
that we have no right to address the masses-it is not for us to
teach them. But to those elements who were connected with us we
·would like to s:ay three things.
The first thing: the Trots-kyite organization became a centre
:for all counter-revolutionary forces; the Right organization which
·was connected with it and whioh was aiJJout to merge with it, is
just such another centre for a:ll the counter-revolutionary forces
in the country. The government authorities will be able to cope
with these terrorist organizations. On the basis of our own ex:perien.ce we have not the slightest doubt of this.
But there are in the country semi-Trotskyites, quarter-Trots:kyites, one-ei.ghth-Trotskyites, people who helped us, not knowing
·of·the terrorist organization but sympathizing with us, people who
from liibern1ism, from a Fronde against the Party, gave us this
help. To 'these people we say, when a sea-shell gets under a steel
hammer, that is not so dangerous; but when a sea-she>ll gets into
a screw, a propellor, there may be a catastrophe. \Ve are living in
-times of great strain, we are on the verge of war. Before this Court
·and in. this hour of retribution, we say to these elements: whoever
bas the slightest rift with the Party, let him realize that tomorrow
he may be a diversionist, tomorrow he may be a traitor if he does
not thoroughly heal that rift by complete and utter frankness to
ihe Party.
Secondly, we must say to the Trotskyite elements in France,
'Spain and other .countries--and there are such-that the experience of the Russian revolution has shown that Trotskyism is a
wrecker of the labour movement. We must warn them that if they do
not learn from our experience, they will pay for it with their heads.
And fin:ally; we must say to the whole world, to all who are
struggling for peace: Trotskyism is the instrument of the warmongers. We must say that with a firm vodce, because we have
learned it by our own bitter experience. It has been extremely
hard for us lo admit this, but it is an his.torirurl fact, for the truth
o.f which we shall pay with our heads.
This is all that I persona'1ly want to say so that the responsihility I shall be iea.lled upon to bear may not only be a physical
1·espon:sibility, but may also be of some little use.
550

\Ve cannot, nor can I, a.sk for clemency, we have no right to
it. And I will say-there is no pride here; what pride can tl1ere
be·?-that we do not need this clemency. Life in the next few years,
in the next five or ten years, when the fate of the world will be in
the balance, can have meaning only under one condition, and that
is if one is able to take part in the work of life, even in the roughest. But what has occurred precludes this. And in that case clemency would be only nee~less torture. We are a fairly closely-knit
crew; but wheh Nikolai Ivanovich Muralov, Trotsky's closest follower, of whom I was convinced that he would rather perish in
prison than say a single word-when he gave testimony and ex-plained that he did not want to die in the consciousness that his
name would be a banner for every counter-revolutionary scoundrel-that is the profoundest result of this trial.
\Ve all realize to the full the instruments of what historical
forces we have been. It is very sad that we hiave realized this
so late, despite all our learning. But may this realization be of
sen-ice lo others.
The President: Accused Sokolnikov.
Sokolnikov: I do not want to use my l{l;'St plea for the purpose
of denying or refuting any of the materials of the invesHga-tion or

the conclusions of the indictment and the State Prosecutor. I admitted my guilt and my crime at -the preliminary investigation; I fully
admit them.here •and ha<Ve nothing to add. I would on:ly like to
ask the Court to believe me wheri I say that I am concealing nothing, that I have told not half the truth, but the whole truth. I
say this because yesterday the State Prosecutor said in his :speech
that such facts have <>eeurred before, and therefore I consider
it my duty to .stress this, and to stress it precisely in connection
with what the State Prosecutor said.
He men1ioned that the accused in the trial of the united centre
concealed the existence of the political platform of the TrotskyiteZinovievite bloc. I.had occasion in my testimony to make good this
omission. I did not consider it possible in this respect to leave
anything unsaid, and at. the preliiminary investigation I related
everything I knew aibout the politicai platform of the bloc.
\Vhat was my own attitude towards this platform,- and how
was it that I came to be its champion, despite the fact t'hat in ·th~
past. for many long years, I was a faithful member af ·the Prurty'f
To explain this I must say that my public utterances of -1925 -and
1926 undoubtedly already contained all the principal elements of
a program of capitalist restoration. My utterances at that time
were subjected- to annihilating eriticism at the Fourteenth Con551

gress of the Party, and were rebutted by the Party as a whole.
This for a cer~ain time brought me to my senses. But I must confess that I had not rid myself completely of the views I had then
ex.pressed, and in 1932 I became a recidivist.
..
. I returned completely to these old views and again took up
the fight on their behalf. What factors determined this circun1stance? It was determined by the fact that at that time, in 1932, all
the principal oppositionist, anti-Party groups adopted a common
position. The close alliance was restored between the Zinovievites
the Trotskyites on the basis of the program o!f the Rights; and
the closest contad had been established with the Rights in 1932-33,
although they did not formally join the bloc at that time, hut
later. And this circumstance, I must say, held great weight with
me. In 1932, and in 1933, and later in 1935, the fact that the
Rights and the Right centre, who, in the most developed form· and
most consistently-p-c:rhaps not most consisten.tly, lbut consistently-advocated the line of capitalist restoration, reliance on the
kulaks, the fight against industrialization and tihe fight against
collectivization, the fact that the Rights entered the struggle--this
fact had great weight with me.
And later, in 1935-I testified to this at the preliminary investigation, and it must be mentioned now-when the parallel
~entre began lo resume its work, of great importance was the
fact that at this moment the Ri.ghts, as represented by Tomsky,
wfho was empowered to do so by the whole centrall gr0111.p of the
Rights, gave their consent to joining the bloc. This should strengthen the position of the bloc immensely, furnish real opportunities
to wage a struggle, and push forward -the parn:llel centre. This, in
particular, was of significance to me too.
But from this program, despite its anti-Party character, despite
its being diametrically opposed to the socialist program, how did we
pass to the practical activity which was conducted by the parallel
centre and which placed the para11lel centre in the position of
leaders of a group of adventurers, as the State Prosecutor still moremercilessly characterized this group yesterday. Is there any
contradiction between the character of the program, between the
existence of this political program, which after all was the program of a political organization, and those forms of criminal.
abominable activity to which the parallel centre sank? I think
that I shou1d explain iliis at least in a few words.. The first explanation is that the very charader of this program, the very
ehamcter of the program for the rest.oration of capitalism, when
proposed in a s~ialist country, could not mean anything in practice but naked adventurism.
·
And the second .factor. Having committed itself to these views,

and

552

having set itself this aim of restoring capitalism, the bloc found
it.self at the mercy of what is called the logic of the fight. This
ph~'ase is widely used, but in this form it is of course too general.
Tnis is how it happened. with us, this is what our logic of the
struggle meant, a ·struggle that bound the members of the parallel
centre by an iron necessity, and dragged them down step by step.
I do not flhink it is necessary for me to speak here oif thevarious facts, for they have alrea<ly been mentioned at the preliminary investigation and at the trial and are well. known ro
you, Citizen Judges. I think that what I ought to do here is td
make a. brief characterization for you, for the whole country..
and for all those who may be wavering, who might become criminals, who might start an anti-Soviet struggle.
It should be said that having started O'llt with anti-Party views ..
we found ourselves obliged to combat socialism, we found ourselves in the position of fighting our Party, in contradistinction to
the masses of the people who followed the Party.
Our program was anti-Party, anti-socialist. And therefore it
immediately developed and turned out to be an anti-people program. \Vhat the State .Prosecutor said here yesterday is after all
true. \Ve could not tell this program to anybody except the immediate members of the centre. We did not even dare to embody
it in a single document, we did not dare to spread it, because the
mere revelation of such a program wou1d spell the bankruptcy of
our bloc.
Our program was anti-people. We could not cormt on the support of the masses. And that meant that the next step was that we
were bound-and such an attempt was made--to pass. to conspiratorial methods of struggle. We found that ':Ye had no weapon
except conspiracy. There was no possibility whatever of a mass.
struggle. But even for conspiracy our own .forces proved inadequate. Even for conspiracy.
If we could count on our criminal plans, our program, receiving support in the country al least from coteries of conspirators,
who might within the country represent a menace to the existence
of the Soviet government, to the existence of the Soviet system,
perhaps we might have developed conspimtori:ail tactics-there;
have been examples of this in the past. But we could not command
sufficient forces even for conspiracy, and we were obliged to seek
forces, to seek -allies outside our organization and outside ourcountry. We were obliged to seek any allies we could come across,
and we came across such as were the bitterest enemies of those
with whom we had started the struggle.
And so we passed from conspifacy to .adventures, and these
adventures immediately led us ink> the fascist pitfall because
553

we had found allies in the fascist organization, and they seized
hold of us and we became their puppets.
That, concretely, is how one ca:n ·conceive, how we at pre&ent
conceive, how we at present understand-I think that this ap~
plies to the other members of the parallel centre and the organiza1Jon--how we all regard this matter.
·
We imagined that we could utilize hostile forces, but as a
matter of fact we. found ourselves to be an absolutely impotent,
contemptible and vile puppet in their hands. But I must say that
when, in 1932, I agreed to become a member ()If the reserve centre,
I of course did not reaHze the whole of t!his picture. . . . I do not
}\.now whether this is of any interest, of any significance to the
Court at this moment, but LSuch was the fad. Of course, I did not
realize the whole of this picture, I had no idea how all this would
turn out; I had nQ idea what the reserve centre would do. Neither
<lid I realize that our forees would prove to be S-O insignificant,
and that this utter insignificance of our for·ces woul-d lead to ignominy, to the shameful end of our policy, to our annihilation
:and fall.
Of oonrse, I think that nobody will assume that throughout
these years of struggle I, for example, experienced no waverings,
participatoo· in this ~truggle without any internal discord, without
internal difficulties. All these did ex·rst. But I must say, that of
course as long as the struggJe continued I, and I think the other
members of the centre, were possessed by a frenzied pas·sion for
the struggle, and we went from step to step believing that there
-woul-d be, so to speak, some kind of success.
Despite these waverings, despite the fact that in e~ch of us~ in
each of the mem.bers of the centre, in ea:ch of the members of
the organization, there remained, and made itself felt this second
soul~I am using the word in its best sense-which had been
tmined in him by his revolutionary work before his fall, his blindness and dis.grace.
I would like also to say, Citizen Judges, that when I _was arrested, when .r was informed oif the facts in possession of the investigating authorities regarding the existernce of the parallel
centre, I rea1ized that this was complete defeat, tihat is, that the
complete defeat of the bloc had arrived. But the first motive that
induced JJ1e to give testimony, to oolllfes;s my guilt, was precisely
the fact that I realized thrut this wais the end oif the activities -0f
the bloc, that any attempt to preserve any remnants of this bloc;
and so on, might only lead to further and still worse decay;
that it would he complete madness and 'that I must have the
oourage to admit my def~t and tp answer for what I had done,
so as, if possible of course, .to repa~r the evil that hard been done.
554

But I arrived at this point during the course of the inves.t[gation. all the more that during the investigation I b~me acquainted
with a number of materials regaTding the work of the organization
of which I, as a member of the centre, for conspiratorial reasons
was not given complete· information, just as the other members
of the centre <lid not have complete information. And I mu.st say
that the rank and file members of the bloc, and even certain of the
prominent pro,v.incial members of course, did not .know everything.
But we, the members of the centre, also did not knaw everything.
We were divided, separated from each other, by the conspiratorial
conditions. And of course I cannot refrain from saying that the investigation of the activities of our bloc showed me what our directiv-es (I do not deny that we are answerable for these directives)
bad been converted into, what had become of them, what filth,
what hideousness, what political corruption. . . . I cannot but
shrink in horror from this picture, from the picrture of our crimes.
And it was natural tha:t it was with so much the .greater sincerity
and so much the greater willingness that I decided completely to
reveal ihe activities of our organization, so as to put an end to
them.
Citizen Judges, I will not speak at great length; I have very
little left to say. Rega·rding Trotsky's rale in the work of our organization I can add nothing to the information and the evalua.· tions which were here given by the members of the centre--Pyatakov and Radek. I think that these evaluations have been sufficiently frank, and I ful:ly shaTe them. But I cannot add anything of
my own, because I was not in direct communication with Trotsky. I was not directly connected with him, and received information through third persons.
Yesterday the State Prosecutor, Citizen the Procurator, concluded his speech by saying that we all sitting in the dock deserve
the death penalty. I cannot dispute, I have no 1grounds for disputing. the cond.usfon of the State Prosecutor; that condusion of
course is justified to the maximum. But I would like to say t'hat
I think that by tlhe facts of the indictment, by the facts of the in/vestigation, and even by yeste~day's speech of the State Prosecutor
we are already politically dead and buried.
I express the conviction, 9r ait any rate the hope, that not one
person wlU nO'W be found in the Soviet Union ''"ho would attempt
to take up the Trots:kyite banner. I tihink that Trolskyism in other
o:mntries too has been exposed by this trial, and that Trotsky
himself has been exposed as an ally of capitalism, as the vilest
agent of fascism, as a fomenter of world war who will be hated
and execrated by the millions everywhere.
_
I therefore think that inasmuch as 'f.rotskyisin, as a counter555

revolutionary politka[ force, ceases to· exist, !has .been finally
smashed, I think that I and the other aooused, all the accused~
may nevertheless plead, Citizen Judges, for clemency. I do iwt
regar.d this as impossible or shameful for myself and for the othe;·
participants in the trial. Of course, every one of us has his own
individual share of responsibility. I do not doubt the fairness,
the absolute impartiality of the Supreme Court of the Union. I
think that everything of an extenuating character, everything that
speaks in favour of clemency that may be found in my own case·
or in the case of others, will be weighed by the Court. I therefore
will not mention anything that it seems to me speaks in favour of
clemency. I repeat, I await lihe just decision of the Supreme Court.
But as regards tihe general rt"Sp(}nsibility o.f the accused, and
not their individual responsibility, I repeat that I think that the
Trotskyite organization, that Trotskyism itself is dead, has come
to be hated by the masses, has been buried and cannot rise again.
I think that this circumstance perhaps may be regarded by the
Court as a reason for clemency and, I repeat, I appeal to the
Court for clemency and through the Court to our whole people,
for whose forgiveness I publicly plead.

The President: Accused Serebryakov.
Serebryakov: I am using my-last plea as one of :the accused not
in order to defend myself. I want to say here that I fully and
wholly admit the justice of what Citizen the Prosecutor said yesterday about my most grievous crimes against the country, against
the land of the Soviets, and against the Party. It is p:aiinful to realize
that I, who entered the revolutionary movement in my early years
and was an honest and devoted Party member for two decades
ended by becoming an enemy of the people and find myself here
in the dock. But I realize that it happened because, having once
committed :a political error I subsequently persisted in it, I aggravated this error, which, by the inevitable logic of fate, developed into mos<!: grievous crimes. For me, of course, it is a belated
question. But it may be a lesson for al:l those who have not fully
realized that to persist in one's error while remaining in the Party
inevitaibly leads where it led me.
I gave sincere testimony during the investigation and in Court
because I really had definitely and finally broken with tthe counter·
revolutionary banditry of Trots:ky and Trotskyism. I therefore
a:sk the Court to believe in my sincerity, to take cognizance of it
in making its decision.

556

The President: Accused Boguslavsky.
Boguslavsky: The trial has disclosed a hideous picture of crime,
ireacheTy, blood and treason. And in this picture I occupy a defi11ite place, a place which is rightly defined in the language of the
Criminal Code by the articles cited in the indictment and whiah
was emphasized yesterday by the State Prosecutor as a confirmation of the com;t investigation. I stand before.you today as a state
<>ffender, a betrayer, a traitor.
I cannot but asik. myself the same question for fhe thousandth
time, this lime before you, Citizen Judges, and through you before
the class which bore me, which·raised me: how did it happen? It
is not a rhetoric.al commonplace question. It requires an answer,
and w!hen I pondered over this question many many times I gave
myself the following answer.
·
The logic of struggle .is rea1ly a generality, and as I see it,
explains very little. For the logic of struggle by no .meanis must
invariably lead to those loathsome crimes to whioh this so-called
logic led me and the otihers accused in this pal'ticular case.
I see several causes which I consider necessary to set forth
to you here, Citizen Judges.
It began with a trifle which seems innocent enough at first
sight. In 1923 a group Ptf Trotskyites, headed by Tro1sky, some of
whom are sitting 1.ogether with me in the dock, drew up the soealled "letter o;f the 46" which already contained all the elements
of wh.at we ended up with. I recall my feelings, and I believe they
were not mine alone, iwhen I signed that letter. Here were ]>e:fore
me authorifafo,-e comrade&--Bolshev.iks, tho:lding ,extremely i:e"'
sponsible posts, responsible positions in the Party and the government. And I forgot what Lenin )had repeate<l.ly taught the Party,
that one must not believe authoritv alone or words alone; he
taught us conscientiously to ex.amin~ all documents pertaining to
the dispute in order to form our opinion. I personally regard th.is
blind faith in so-called authorities as responsible f'or my fall,
which is not only profound but irrevoca'ble.
The second cause is also failure to remember one of Lenin's
bequests, one fundamental in Party life, to the effect that once
you stray from the road, once you commit an error, you must not
persist in and insist on your inistakes, for, as the State Prosecutor
rightly stated yesterday, l:!his can and does lead, as it did· ~n our
ease, to the fascist counter-revolutionary swamp.
And finally the rthird cause. I consider it necessary to mention
it again, I spoke of it in 'my testimony here in Court. This is ·the
system of deceit, the system of constant deceit, and I must say
that it was n.0.t only in 1934 and in 1935, wihen !:hey concealed the
557

so-called instructions, that deceit on the part of Trotsky and his.
close associates. was disclosed. \Vell, when one analyses that
whole period of the struggle one sees that this deceit was practiced
very often. I must tell this to the Court. Why I speak of deceit I·
shall say later. I must tell the Court that, for example, to many of
uS Trotskyites, myself included, who were in Moscow at the tinie
and were fairly close to Trotsky and his clo!>est companions in
arms, to UJS the transfer of what was already then an anti-Soviet
struggle to the streets on November 7, 1927, was a surprise.
They conceale9- this from us and we were faced with the fact of
the demonstration, we were faced with the fact, with the neeessity of fighting for that senseless, criminal anti-Soviet step, for the
first attempt to transfer t:he struggle to the streets. I recall this
in o:rder to say that this was not fortuitous. It is a method, it is
a system, and I .empha,size this again today because Trotsky is.
still alive, and his venomous fangs have not yet been extracted,
today he continues to deceive not only his own adherents but
also tries, fortunately without success, to deceive the workers. In
our country he fails in this, but may he not succeed to some extent
in doing so in other countries and thus the exposure of this deceit
.is an ,urgg_p.Lnec.essity. Ai::i.d I consider this system of deceit as
one of the causes of such a deep and final downfall. I assure you,
Citizen Judges, th.at I do not say this in order to find extenuating
circumstances, circumstances that extenuate my personal guilt,
I do not know how to look for them, where to find them,
although, I do not conceal it, I would like to find them and I
would like you, Citizen Judges, to help me find them. I want you to
help to find them, by examining the whole matter. But I consider
it necessary to draw your attention to this system of deceit and
warn everyone who is not yet convfoced of this deceit that this.
system is fatal just as it proved fatal for me.
It is self-evident that there is nothing else to be said, save that
the inspirer and organizer of all this criminal activity of ours
was _Trotsky, and the task of his exposure, complete and final, is.
the basic task besides the task of finding the specific criminals;
his accomplices here in our country.
Citizen Judges, when you come to ,the quest.ii.on of my punisihment I ask you to take cognizance of the following: I am no longer
a young man, I am over fifty and not all of these years af mine
are filled with a criminal content. The Party knew me as a devoted fighter both with a gun on my shoulder in the partisan and
Red Guard detachments and on the fi:ont of Soviet construction,
on the econowJ·c front.
I/ 80 not say this iin order to cmve anything for myiself on
the plea of my work. This work has been undone many times
558

over bv the loathsome c:rimes I have committed. But I mention
it for the sake of the following. \\,.hen I ask myself whether I am
really a hardened and incor:rigible criminal, I answer: No, this
cannot be. And this gives me the right to acsk for clemency, to.
plead for mercy.
\\'hen I recall that it was not so long ago that I carried an important and honest work this also gives me the right to beg forclemency.
.
And when 'faced with the end, I ask you one thing, Ci"t.izcn
Judges: give me a chance, by dying a natural death, give me a
chance in the years of life that still remain to me, through any
work in any place, to try and make at least some amends for the
crimes I have committed against the country and against the working class.
The State Prosecutor was right yesterday when he said: eui
country is strong and powerful. We were unable by our heinous
crimes to affect even by a jot the victorious course of the revolution in our country. And in this light, against this background
I ask you to give me a chance, to the limit of my strength, to make
even slight amends for my crimes, to expiate my crimes. That is
why I ask you for leniency. That is why I ask yol.l to spare my
life.

The President: Accused Drobnis.
Drobnis: Yesterday the State Prosecutor gave a complete and
exhaustive summary of all my heinous crimes. And so I, a worker,.
a shoemaker, who at the a.ge of 15 became an active revolutionary, a Party member who served six years in a tsarist prison,
who survived three death. sentences, sit in the dock as a grave offender, as a traitor to my country.
Raised and nurtured by the working class, I turned against
that class, as its bitterest enemy and traitor. I committed crime
after crime and was clearing the way for Trotsky, who was betraying and selling the land of socialism and the working class
wholesale and retail, hastening the advent of a bloody war.
All of thi1s happened ibecause for years I continued to 1ivein the stuffy, stinking, fo~l, evil-smelling Trotskyite underworld. I ibreathed this poisoned air and even when, for exam~
ple, I went to Central Asia and evad-ed real activities, I lacked
the resolution and will power to break with it finally. At lf!he
first summons of the reserve centre I went to Western Siberia
as a reinforcement in order to perpetrate loathsome and heinous.
crimes, without making it clear to myself for what purpose I was.
doing it.
559

Blinded, I did loathsome and heinous things at the construction sile where I worked. I saw the enthusiasm and devotion of the \Yorkers, it attracted me, but a sin1ster force held me
.back.
Arrest and imprisonment were the ipurgatory which enabfo<l
·roe completely to ·S\ve.ep away, to Tid myiself of, all that filth
I did this with complete determination, with comp[ete firmnes~
.and oons.istency..
· YeSll:er<liay the State Prosecutor justly expressed his doubt.
I a:sk you ito believe me that I have purged myself and wasib.ed
rotten putrid. Trotskyism from every recess of my mind, I have
.dealt with it ruthlessly. The investigating 1authorities can con·firm that I sometimes even urged them on in this connection
and gave my~lf IIJ.O respite, in order to have done with this
finally arid irrevocably.
I am forty-six years of age. And not long before my arrest
the thirtieth anniversary of any membership in the Party passed.
I have become an outcast and an accursed son of the working
masses. The Court will pass sentence upon me. However severe
this sentence may be I shall accept it as my due and as deserved .
.But if, Citizen Judges, you find it in the least possible to save me
from a shameful death, and, after putting me to the severest test,
permit me to return to the ranks of the class from which I came,
I shall regard it as my great and sacred duty fully to justify this
gift of the toiling people and to serve it to the end of my days.

The President: Accused Muralov.
Mural'ov: I refused counsel and I refused. to speak in my de·fence because I am used to defending myself with good weapons
.and attacking with good weapons. I have no good weapons with
which to defend myself.
Yesterday the State Prosecutor cast .doubt upon our sincerity,
the sincerity of our testimony. I applied this to myself too; because, naturally, doubt regarding criminals is quite legitimate.
But I assure the Court that neither at tihe investigation nor
here in Court did I conceal anything in my te5timony, that I
gave exhaustive information ;regarding my .criminal activity and
·gave the 'P'roper appraisal. I have alrea•dy mentioned how I arrived at this conclusion. I struggled with myseM for a long time.
r .recalled the sayings of the great leaders of Marxism, the saying
of one of the wisest men of antiauitv who lived hundreds of vears
before our times that "ev~ry ~.n. {:;an/ make a mist~ke but -he is
a fool who does not ad.nut his mistake," and I will a<l,d, and
560

~-rimes as well. I did not want to remain a fool, I did not want to

remain a criminal, for had I refused to give teslim0<.ny I would
have been the banner for those counter-revolutionary elements
that _unfortunately still remain on the territory of the Soviet
Republic. I idid not want to be the root from which poioonous
shoots would sprout. I d•id not want to be the seed from which
would grow poisonous tares instead of wholesome wheat, and this,
plus my old, J?olshevik- mettle, .compelled me to admit all my
crimes and this· is why I did not and do not conceal anything.
It would be unworthy for me to accuse anyone of having drawn
·me into the Trofskyirte organization. Although I came from a
poor toiling family iand forged my own way to. rui eduication and
a position, when I joined workers' drcles in 1899 and the Party
in 1905 and in my subsequent activity I was a~.ways a conscious,
intelligent and educated man especially at the time when Trotskyism began. I do not dare to blame anyone for this, I myself am to
.blame. This is my guilt. This is my misfortune.
·
For over a decade I was a faithful soldier of Trotsky, that
foe of the labour movement, that agent of the fascists, enemy
of the working class and the Soviet Union, wlho deserves every
contempt. But for more than two decades I had been a loyal
soldier .of the Bolshevik Party. All these circumstances compelled
me to tell and ;relate everything honestly both at the investigation and in Court. These are not empty words on my part
be.cause in my earlier days, in tfue best days of my life, I was
attnstomed to being a faithful soldier of the revolution, a ifr.ie~d
of the working class. I ask that this frank testimony be taken into
.account when passing sentence on me.

The President: Accused Norkin.
Norkin: During the investigation I told everything about my
crimes without concealing anything. I fully repented. Ml my testimony is utterly sincere and accurate. This is enough to enable the
Court, after going into all details and eircumstances, to reach the
necessary decision. If the Court finds any of the circumstances .sufficient to mitigate the verdict and to spare my life, I declare that I
shall accumulate strength with the utmost eagerness, irt the hope of
spending it in the struggle against fascism. And in case of a different decision, in case this plea of mine in Court is the last act
of my life, I want to take advantage of it to convey my seething
contempt and hatred for Trotsky. There is enough of it for
Trotsky to share it liberally with all his partners and the
real bosses of' the fascist general staffs and intelligence
services.
561

The President: Accused Shestov.
Shestov: Citizen Judges! For 13 years I was a member of the
counter-revolutionary Trotskyite terrorist, disruptive an<l fascist
·organization. For the last five years I was actively preparing ·
and attempted to kill the leaders of the toiling people, the leaders
of the working class and of those oppressed in the capitalist world.
For the last five years I carried on active <lestru:ctivc and disruptive work in the coal pits and mines of the ·Kuznetsk Basin.
For the last five years I was a traitor, I was an agent of the most
reactionary detachment of the world bourgeoisie, an agent of
German fascism.
What forced me, a former worker, the son of a working family,
to belong to the organization of murderers, to the organization of
traitors to the socialist fatherland? I will not conceal that from
1923 on, step by step, stage by stage, I climbed higher and higher
and came close to the organizer of the fascist agents-Trotsky
and to his closest lieutenants~Sedov, Smirnov and Pyatakov. My
acquaintance with them, the rapprochement and especially the
last meeting in 1931 and their attention to me, flattered me and I
abandoned myself fully and wholeheartedly to counter-revolutionary terrorist and espionage :activities. In 1923 I first betrayed
the working class. In 1923 I first began to struggle against the
Party he::i,<;led by Stalin, who holds and carries the banner of
Marx, Engels and Lenin in his strong, firm hands. In that struggle I employed every loathsome, every filthy and every destructive method. I stand before you utterly exposed. I told of everything that brought me to the dock. I did not surrender on the first
day of my detention. For five weeks I denied everything, for five
weeks they kept confronting me with one fact after another, with
the photographs of my dastardly work and when I looked back,
I myself was appalled by what I ha<l done.
A particle, still not killed, of working man's conscience, of the
conscience of the toiling people, that l still. retained, compelled
me to tell the fruth and I decided like a prodigal son to go to my
class brothers and tell everything I knew and ha.d done. There in
Siberia, at the headquarters of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, at the preliminary investigatfon, in cell number 23, I
often quivered like an aspen leaf when facing my crimes, and it
was this that gave me the calmness with which I told you of
my criminal activities. I knew. what I was headed for, I knew
where I was going and I knew what was in store for me if the
organization I wa~ leading were exposed. I am not asking for
mercy, I do not want clemency. The proletarian Court must not
and cannot spare my -life. Here before you, in the face of the
552

whole working people, in the face of those oppressed by capitalism in all countries, to the best of my ability I shot to pieces
the ideology that held me captive for thirteen years. And now I
have only one desire, to stand with the same calmness on the
place of execution and with my blood to wash away the stain .of a
traitor to .qiy country.

T/:le President: Accu_:;ed Stroilov.

Stroilov: All my crimes and the full weight of IJJ.Y ;SU.ilt for
which there can be no justification ai::e fµlly presented and prOYed
by my own confessions as well as by the exhaustive analysis made
by the S~ate Prosecutor in his spe~.h. H:aving betrayed my country,
in small matters at first, I sank lower and lower, becoming ~ agent
of the German intelligence service and carryin,g out its loathso~~
assignments. Together with this, . altbough I had never been in
the Party, although I had never been a Trotsky~te, I also became
an agent of the Trotskyites, whose assignments were in no way
different from and often exceeded the assignments of the <ierm.an intelligence service.
Although all my criminal activities resulted from ~his
twin pressure upon me I cannot in any degree minimize my
crimes and the gravity of my guilt which is very great before
the country. It is further. aggravated and intensified by the fact
that the I!arty and government treated me very well. This was
~xpressed in my social position, it was also expressed in the encouragement I received .and a number of awards that,were given
me.
It was expressed in the fact that I was appointed to the most
responsible position in the country held by a non-Party engineer.
I was given such favourable material and living conditions. as
were several times above the concept of a well-to-do life even in
the literal sense. But at the beginning of 1934 I tried to sever
my criminal ties with the intelligence service of a hostile state and
I encountered fierce resistance on the part of the Siberian centre
of the Trotskyite organization which urged me to continue the
joint work.
At the time I was puzzled -by this kinship between the German intelligence service and 'the Trotskyites, as I had no knowl~dge of either the so-called platform or the so-called political goal
:which had been set by the parallel centre.
Here in Court it became clear to me that ;they are kindred
;people, kindred in their methods of work, people who resolved
lo sell piecemeal the territory of the Soviet Union.
As a person holding an offidalposHic:in as well as a person who
'563

in general saw how wrecking activities were -developing in their
acutest form I attempted in a number of cases to put into effect
organizational and technical industrial measures in the interest
of work. And here again I encountered the goading of representatives of the Trotskyite organization, who accused me of liberalism, of the psychology o.f an intellectual, de., and I went on with
these activities. And while I severed all ties with the German intelligence service and with the .foreign state in gen-eral in the second
half of 1935, the ,pressure of the Trotskyites continued. Anrd this
double life accompanied me all the time. On the one hand I carried
out the assignments coming from the source of the TrotskyiteZinovievite centre. On the other hand, seeing the splendid attitude
towards me of the public organizations, the Party and the government, I felt that this wrecking went counter to the creative spirit
wbich I as an engineer could understand. I could not but carry
out a number of measures which went beyond the bounds of my
duties as chief engineer of the trust. I have published a number
of technical studies which for the first time have appeared in
print in the Soviet Union. I proposed a number of inventions,
some of which were not only adopted on a mass scale in the
Kuzbas but are now also being utilised by other trusts of the
coal industry, inventions safeguarding workers' lives and providing great economic and technical advantages.
At the end of February 1936 I firmly resolved to leave the
Kuznetsk Basin for good and go away. But while I .spoke of
this only to the management, I encountered opposition both in
Novosibirsk and in Moscow and I had to stay in the Kuznetsk
Basin and feel the burden of my criminal connections with the
Trotskyites.
I shall not enumerate all my crimes in the way of wrecking
activities. They are grave and extensive and they were all
enumerated in the preliminary investigation and by the Procurator. At the bottom of the list I see the tremendous sum-total of my
crimes. I see the tremendous bill which the Soviet Jarid presents
to me.
But I ask the Court in passing sentence upon me to take into
account that as regards my origin from 1among small farmers,
as regards my working experience which dates only from 1921,
i.e., I had no experience in capitalist society, and as regards my
nature I am not alien to the proletariat and am not in the least
hostile to Soviet power.
If I fell so low, betraying my country, this fall occurred
not here but abroad, as a result of a whole conglomeration of
provocations and shadowing, as also of my contacts with the Trot564.

skyites, which were exclusively the result of blackmail and extortion on their part.
Likewise, I ask the Court to take into consideration the fact
that I never was in the least connected with terrorist activity.
I did not even know of terrorist acts and of the preparations for
them. But my guilt and my crimes are great. I admit them
fully and sincerely to the end.
I ask the Court to show clemency to me, to spare me, to preserve
my life. I have 'experience and I will make every effort to mobilize
my knowledge and experience so as to make at least partial amends
for my tremendous guilt before the proletarian state by productive work, by constructive work.
I ask you to believe the sincerity of this declaration of mine
and I ask the Court to give me a chance to return to the toiling
family of Soviet peoples.
The President: The Court will adjourn until 6 p.m.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military .Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:
A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank
PRESIDENT:

/

565

EVENING SESSibN, JANUARY 29, 1937, 6:00 P.M.
Commandant:'The Cburt is coming. ·Piea~e rise.
The Presideiit:.Th'e 'Session is resumed. Accused Arnold.
Arnold: Citizen .Judges, from childhood I received as a heritage
frotn tsarist -Russia the shameful brand of being an "illegitimate
child." In adapting myself to life, which has .turned out such a
tangle, I can lay sole ·blame for this on tsarist Russia, on the capitalist society to whiCh I was adapting myself. As a result, as it has
turned out, I~a worker, of working class parents, suddenly landed
in the ranks of the Trotskyites.
·
·I haive already·· spoken about this in court and I stress once
again that because.of my weak, low political development, I was
not able to get my bearings in the complicated questions of politics, and as a result I found myself under the influence of such
strong Trotskyites and became a member of their organiza-:tion. I took part in crimes against the foremost leaders of the Party
and government, raising my hand against them. And I am very
glad that I did not succeed in this. I realized my loathsome
crime, and immediately left Prokopyevsk. I tried to redeem my
abominable action by work.
At the preliminary investigation and here in Court I have made
a clean breast of everything, and there is no more of that filth left
in me. I have never felt my biography to be as clean as it is now,
after I have told about everything that happened to me. Citizen
Judges, I am not yet an altogether lost man. I can still work and
be of use to the society from which I came. Notwithstanding the
fact that I have committed a great crime, notwithstanding the fact
that the Procurator -demands the supreme measure -0f punishment
in ·my case, I nevertheless ask you to spare me my life, and I will
try to justify this not by words but by deeds:

.

The President: Accused Livshitz.
Livshitz: Citizen Judges! The charge advanced against me by

the State Prosecutor is still further aggravated by the fact that I
was raised by the Party from the ranks to a high position in state
administration-to that of Assistant People's Commissar of Railii66

ways. I enjoyed the confidence of the Party, I enjoyed the confidence of Stalin's cornrade-in-arm-s, Kag.anovich. I trampled· this
confidence in the counter-revolutionary Trotskyite quagmire, and
took the course of treachery and treason against the country.
How <lid this happen? How was I engulfed in the counterrevolutionary quagmire? Beginning with disagreement with the
Party and support of Trotsky on the most important, the· most
decisive question of our proletarian revolution-on the building·upof socialism in our country-I descended step· by- step, driveri by
the logic of the struggle, from factional work to. 'll'ilder.ground'
work, and from underground work to wrecking, acts of diversion
and treason against the country. I cannot maintain; I. cannot plead
that I did nc·t know the whole program of Trotsky and- of the
centre, although in reality I did not know the whole program as it
has been disclosed -at this triaL The factremains·thatTrotsky is·the
organizer, the inspirer of the restoration of capitalism in-our country. Together with the most rabid and the-.darkest· forces of fascism, Trotsky is preparing war and defeat of the U.S.S-.R. in this.
war, and in this vil-e treaeherous work 1' aided- h-im. So Ireached the extreme limit. The last boundary line is being drawn
at this trial.
Citizen Judges, in examining all the material' -of the indictment
and the investigation, I ask you to· bear in mind: that I: am forty
years old. My life is filled not only with crimes~ I was· devoted· t&
the Party, to the working class and to the revolution for many:
years: I worked honestly and devotedly; I do not consider myself
completely lost; I consider myself still capable of honestly serving
the working class and the revolution. This entitles me to. ask the:
proletarian Court, the Soviet Court to spare me my life, to· give
me a chance to redeem at least a part of my monstrous crimes by
honest work. This is the mercy which Ii ask of. the proletarian
Court.

The President: Accused. KnY,azev.
Knyazev: Yesterday I listened to the speech of the State }'.lro.secutor with the 1:1tmost attentic·n and intensity.
Notwithstanding the fact that it was severe, spea:Jtipg, honestly
I must frankly and courageously say that it was just; as was the
way the Citizen Prosecutor characterized my crimes against the,
Party and the country. I can only say one- thing· here: th-at not a-t
a single step, not for one moment during my two. and a half yearsof criminal work in the Trotskyite organization) in my connections
with the Japanese, have I ever pursued personal aims and< personal>
interests. On this score my conscience is clear. Yes, l will say mgre
567

than was said by the State Prosecutor. I worked to prepare
for war. To_ put it simply, I worked for the approach of war, in
order to clear the path, to pave the way for the coming to power
of the scoundrel Trotsky. During these two and a half years I have
experienced many painful moments, but what I heard in court
about how our centre engaged in wholesale and retail selling of
the territory of the Soviet Union-notwithstanding all my painful
experiences, I must say outright that my hair stood on end._ . I am not a politician, it is true, but not a political ignoramus
either. I understand perfectly well what it means to surrender the
Ukraine, what it means to surrender the Maritime Province and
the Amur region. It was only needed to a:dd one thing, and this
obviously was in line with the further conception, as I understood
from all the charges-to surrender the· Baku and Grozny oilfields
and the railways, 'l't.nd then the whole of Russia would be a firstclass colony of German fascism.
I understand perfectly well that the political power in any state
is based first and foremost on its economic foundation. And who
but a desperado who descends to this wholesale and retail bartering, who has turned into a first-rate fascist, could act like that?
lf.aIJy gtu~, wtio \~or}(ed in the provinces, who trusted the
centre, had found out about this-this is no place for tragic words
-hut I declare outright that these realist politicians would have
lost their beards pretty quickly. Obviously, we would have gone
together to the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs. But as
it is, it is they who came for us.
I sincerely declare th~t I had no hand in this criminal bartering away of the state, and I declare· that Livshitz never spoke to
me about il
I want to add something about the train wrecks.
The Citizen State Prosecutor has quite rightly said that the
whole strength of our undermining, wrecking, diversive activities
was centred in these train wrecks. Why, it may be asked? Train
wrecks and accidents on the railways are a field in which wreckers, diversive agents and class enemies can carry on their work
with impunity, without being disclosed.
_ This happens because notwithstanding the tremendous constructive and creative work which Lazar Moiseyevich has done
during a little more than a year and a half of work on the railways,
the nientality of a number
officials and a large number of specialists is such that they have not outlived the idea that it is im·possible for the railways to work without train wrecks and accidents, that train wrecks and accidents are an inevitable consequence or concomitant of_ the complex operations on the railways.

of

1>68

It is in this, what I might call conviction and psychological
domination of a theory which still exists and which, I repeat, has
not been completely outlived, that enemies find a place for themselves. \Ve, too, found a field for our wrecking activities here.
Citizen Judges, my life-story is inextricably intertwined with
the whole of our revolution. I have risen to high posts as chief of
important railways and was on two occasions virtually the technical director of the mos.t vital administration on the railways, the
operations department. As far back as the days of Felix Edmundovich Dzerzhinsky, who kept me close to himself, I worked together
with him on the railways. I was the first who, at his instructions,
concluded an agreement on international communications with
foreign states.
Having risen to high posts, I enjoyed the particular confidence
of the Party and of the government and of L. M. Kaganovich. I will
say sincerely that in this year and a half, during which I have had
occasion to meet Lazar Moiseyevich personally more than once,
we have had many talks, and during these talks I always experienced a dreadful feeling of pain when Lazar Moiseyevich always said to me: "I know you as a railway worker who knows
the railways both from the theoretical and from the practical sid~.
But why do I not feel in you that wide range of activity which I
have a right to demand of you?" This range of activity was at the
command of my criminal work, and I repeat that it needed superhuman efforts to get through these conversations. But I had not
sufficient courage to confess.
At this trial, both at the preliminary investigation and here in
court, I have sincerely tried to confess everything up to the very
last, without any compulsion to do so, from the first day when the
investigation began. And I feel that I have fulfilled this up to the
end of my trial, for despite all the severity with which the State
Prosecutor characterized my crimes, he could not forbear to admit
that my statements were marked by conscientiousness. I ask the
Citizen Judges to take into account this sincerity of mine.
I also ask that in determining my fate you take into account
the declaration which I submitted before the beginning of the
investigation, in which I wrote that if my life ·were spared,
I would· try with all my power, my knowledge and devotion to
redeem all my crimes, and I confirm once again th.at I will redeem
them.

The President: Accused Turok.
. Turpk: Citizen Judges, I took the Trotskyite path in 1931, and
-Of course from this path, when working in the Urals in 1934, I lagi.. 569

cany· took the path of direct counter-revolutionary wrecking acts
and treason to the country.
._
.
Since that time I have actively participated in that counterrevolutionary practical work, carrying out in practice the criminal
· program which was given by Trotsky from abroad and by our
eentre.
·
I must say here that if iri 1931 I adhered to Trotskyism by
chance, in· 1934 my active and infamous work was no· Ionger a:
niatter of chance. That is why it wa~ active.
Citizen Judges, I, whom the Prose~utofin his speecn has called·
a' bandit, comparing rire and Iiiy companions in the dock and in
Ctime with those who lurk on the highway with bludgeon a:nd·
dagger-moreover this description was not the result of a chance
phrase chosen by the Prosecutor but was the r·esult of those crirtiinal acfa which I committed-'-!, of course, find it very· ha:rd to
ask the proletarian Court, and through it, in effect, the Soviet
people, for clemency to· me, a traitor a·nd a bandit. But I must
declare to you that I did not carry on a !Struggle against the Party
all ri1y life, much Jess take a clearly counter-revolutionary' path.·
Out of the twenty years of my membership in the Party, I served
the cause o:f the revolution honestly' and devotedly for fourteen'
years. I took active part in the civil war; I was rewarded by the
government. Of course, Citizen Judges, I do not want to say-and·
it would be monstrous t6 think this-that·these past serviees of
rilirie ih any way outweigh the monstrous crimes which I have·
committed and for which I am now being tried. But these small'
services Of mine show that I can nevertheless ask you fot clemency,
which would give me a chance to die not as an agent of fascism-.
And, were my life given me, I would be able, through tentrcious;
and honest labour, to return to the bosom of the builders of sodalfsin. So I ask you, Citizen Judges, to take this declaration of mine
into account. I have given the most merciless and the most frank
testimony both about my ovm activities and about the activities
of the organization to which I belonged. I ask once again', if rt' is'
p6'ssible, to take my declaration into account.

The President: Accused Rafaichak.
Rataiclzak: Citizen Judges, it is painfulto speak of aU the erinies
committed by each one of us, the members of the Trotskyih~
counter-revolutionary organization. It is particularly painful to
-speak now, after the State Prosecutor's- exhaustive and: correct
description of all the acts committed by this counter-revolutionary
c>'rganizf!tion, by all the accused seated here in the dock ancf by
oeach one of them individually.
570

At the investigation I made exhaustive and sincere depositions
about the whole work which was carried out by others at my;
instructions. I menlioned all the members of this vile organization
who were known to me, in order not to leave any tail-ends or remnants whatever, not to leave any people who were even in the
slightest degree contaminated with the rottenness of this Trntsky:.
ite morass. Prior to my connection with the Trotskyite orgamza·
tion, I neYer engaged in -espionage nor in adventurism. In linking
my fat~ with this counter-revolutionary organization, I became
the agent of Trotsky, became the agent of fascism. It is very har'~
to draw the border-line here, for there is no border-line between
the agents 9f Trotsky and the agents·of fascism.
I carried out a number of .acts, and persons connected with me
carried them out at my instructions--monstrous acts of crime·
against the Party, against the Soviet power, against the Soviet'
people. In 1935 it had already become perfectly clear that this
whole struggle was not a struggle against the leaders of the Party
and the government, was not a struggle for a change in the policy
of the Party and the government, but that it was a struggle, a real
struggle against the whole Russian people who are building their
new life. With our hands we were virtually destroying what had
been created by the honest builders of socialism. We have been
undermining, destroying what the Russian people had been creating during many long years of severe struggle for a change in their
life, for the building up of socialism in the Soviet Union. It has be-'
come perfectly dear that this strug.gle is utterily futile, and Uiat
our actions, our criminal ~ounter-revolutionary actions, cannot in
the least change the struggle of the honest toilers of the Soviet
Union for the completion of socialist construction.
Every act of ours committed at this or that factory only caused
the workers there to display fresh enthusiasm; every act that wa'S
perpetrated evoked a new reaction in the work of the factories, led
to new achievements. In 1935 I virtually ceased: all active work in
this counter-revolutionary organization. But that is not enough.
Having rid myself of my associates, having virtually ceased to cal''ry on an active struggle against the Pa:rty and the government and
the people, I did not find sufficient courage in myself to tell, to disclose the whole filth and the ·whole counter-revolutionary work,
in order to finish with it once and for al[ I looked for a way out,
so that I myself might sever all contact with the people who were
connected with .me and with whom I was connected. I repeat that
. this is not enough: up to the day of my arrest I did nof tell about
the members of my organization and about my own crimes.
My guilt, and also that of many of us who are sitting in the
571'

dock, is aggravated by the fact that I occupied a quite responsible
post, a leading post in one of the most important branches of industry. My guilt is still further aggravated by the fact that I unquestionab'ly and continually enjoyed exceptional confidence on
the part of our People's Commissar of Heavy Industry, on the part
oi the Party and the government. Naturally, as a man who occupied
a responsible position, l must bear greater responsibility than a
rank and file member or participant in all these crimes.
I only want to say, Citizen Judges, that I am not yet an utterly
lost man. I am still capable of working, and if the Court finds it
possible to spare my life, to give me a chance to redeem my guilt
before the Land of Soviets by honest labour, to work so as to redeem in some measure all the crimes that were perpetrated by me,
~sincerely and honestly declare that I shall be able to redeem my
guilt to a considerable extent by honest labour. This is what I ask
of the Court.

The President: Accused Hrasche.
Hrasche: Citizen Judges, I waived my right to make a speech in
defence, nor in my final plea do I want to expatiate on how I came
to such a life, how I descended to betraying the interests of the
toiling people. The facts of my criminal activities are too striking,
and any attempt even to explain them can of course only aggravate
my lot. I ask the Court to believe me when I say that I have wholly
and fully confessed my crimes against the toilers of the Soviet
Union, that I have concealed nothing and have not tried to belittle
my guilt.
I a;sk only that you allow me to attempt to make one correction to the words in which the State Prosecutor characterized me
here. In the course of my criminal activities I have had various
masters, including the fascist intelligence service and the Trotskyites. Believe me, there was an attempt on my part to take another
course, but one intelligence service followed behind the other,
I passed from the clutches of one to those of the other, and finally
the Trotskyite, fascist secret agent, Meyerowitz delivered me into
the hands of the Trotskyite Rataichak. But for all that I was not a
Judas Trotskyite. I had to feel ashamed of myself for my vile
treachery, and could not, as the Trotskyites are doing, conceal
it beneath a kind of ideological superstructure, beneath a kind of
p.olitical platform.
I ask the court to take this into account, as also my full and
frank confession of my crimes, and if possible to give nie a chance
by hones~ la}:>0ur to .~i:igate, ~lbeit partially. the harm I have done
by my cnmmal activities.
·
572

I ask you once again to believe that my confessions, both in
court and at the investigation, were exhaustive and truthful, if
only because I could not but wish to rid myself of the nightmare
of inevitable responsibility which has been weighing on me for
many years past.·

The President: Accused Pushin.
Pushin: Citi,zen Judges, at the investigation and in court I have
told with complete frankness everything that I know about the activities of the counter-revolutionary Trotskyite organization, told
also about my own heavy crimes. I lhave not con<'ealed anything
from ttie Court, desiring in my .sincere account to give an outlet
to the agonizing feeling of my· guilt ·before my country, a feeling which accumulated in me more and more as I began to
understand the true essence and iaims of the counter-revolutionary Tro!skyite organiz:ation, and which found vent dn frank
confession.
And if I now ask the Court for clemency, it is only in order
that, if the Court finds it possible to spare my life, I may devote
this life to honest service for the benefit of my country and my
people, proving this not only !by words of confession and repentance but" also by iliving deeds, by practical work.
The President: -The Court is adjourned.
At 7 :15 p.m. the Court retires to confer.

*

*

*

[The session is resumed at 3:00 a.m. on January 30].
Commandant: Please rise, the Court is coming.
The President: The session is resumed. I will announce the
verdict of the .Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the
U.S.S.R.
THE VERDICT
In the name of the Union of Soviet Socialist Repuhlics the
Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R., consisting of:
President: Army Military Jurist, V. V. Ulrich, President of the
Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.,
Members: Army Corps Military Jurist, I. L. Matulevich, VicePresident of the Military CoUegiUJm of the Supreme Court of the
U.~.S.R., and Divisional Military Jurist, N. M. Rychkov, Member
of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
Secretary: Military Jurist First Rank A. F. Kostyushko, with
the participation of the State Prosecutor, A. Y. Vyshinsky, Procurator of the U.S.S.R. and I. D. Braude: N. V. Kommodov and
S. K. Kaznacheyev, Members of the Moscow CoUegium of Coun573

s·el for Defence, in an open Court session, in the City of Moscow, on
January 23-30, 1937; heard the case against:
1. Pyatakou, Yuri (Georgi) Leoni:dovich,born 1890,employee;
2. Sokolnikou, Grigori Yakovlcvich, born 1888, employee;
3. Radek, Karl Berngardovich, born 1885, journalist;
4. Serebryakou, Leonid Petrovich, born 1888, employee:
5. Liushitz, Yakov Abramovich, born 1896, employee;
6. Muralou, Nikolai Ivanovich, born 1877, employee;
7. Drobnis, Yakov Naumovich, born 1891, employee;
8. Boguslausky, Mikhail Solomonovich, born 1886, employee;
9~ Knyazeu, Ivan Alexandrovich, born. 1893, emiJ)loyee;
10. Rataiclwk, Stanislav Antonovich, born 1894, employee;
ll. Norkin, Boris Osipovich, born 1895, employee;
12. Shestou, Alexei Alexandrovich, born 1896, employee;
13. Stroilou, Mikhail Stepanovich, born 1899, employee_;_
14. Turok, Yosif Dmitrievich, born 1900, employee;
15. Ifrasche, Ivan Yosifovich, born 1886, employee;
16. Pushin, Gavriil Yefrtmovich, born 1896, employee;
17. Arnold, Valentin Volfridovich, alias Vasilyev Valentin Vasilyevich, born 1894, employee,
all being charged.. with having committed crimes covered by Articles 581", 58 8 , 589 and 5811 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.·

The preliminary and Court inuestigaWms have established that:
In 1933, in accordance with direct instructions given by the enemy of the people, L. Trotsky, who was deported from the. U.S.S.R.
in 1929, there was formed in Moscow, apart from the so-called
"united Trotskyite-Z.inovievite terrorist centre," consisting of Zinoviev, Kamenev, Smirnov and others, an underground parallel
:mti-Soviet, Trotskyite centre, members of which were the ac·
cused in the present case, Y. L. Pyatakov, K B. Radek, G. Y. SokolniJrnv and L. P. Serebryakov.
- In accordance with instructions received from the enemy of the
people, L. Trotsky, the principal aim of the parallel a-nti-Soviet
Trotc;kyite centre was to overthrow the Soviet power in the.
U.S.S.R. ~nd to restore capitalism and the power of the botirgroisie
by means of wrecking, diversive, espionage and ten·orist activities
designed to undermine the economic and military power of the
Soviet Union, to expedite the armed attack on the U.S.S.R., to assist foreign aggressors and tobr1ng aJbour the·defeat ofthe U.S.S.Il. ·
In full conformity with this principal aim, the enemy of the people L. Trotsky, abroad,. and the parallel anti-Soviet Trofskyite
cen1re, represented/by Rade.k and Sokolnikov, in Moscow, entered'
into negotiations with certain representatives of Germany and Jap57'4

an. During the course of negotiation 'vith one of the leaders of the
National-Socialist Party of Germany, Rudolph Hess, the enemy
of the people, L. Tro1sky, promised in the event of a Trotskyite government corning to power as a result of the defeat of the Soviet
Union, to make a number of political, economic and territorial
concessions to Germany and Japan at the expense of the U.S.S.R.,
including the cession of the Ukraine to Germany and of the
Maritime Provinces an<! the Amur region to Japan. At the same
time, the eneniy .of .the people, L. Trotsky, undertook i.n the event
of seizing power .to liquidate the state farms, to dissolve the collective farms, to renounce the policy of industriaUzation ,of lhe
country and to restore on the territ-o·ry of the Soviet Union .socia:l
relations of capitalist society. Furthermore, the enemy of the people
L. Trotsky lUlderlook to render all possible help to aggressors .by
developing defeatist propaganda and wrecking, diversive and cg.
pionage activities, both in time of peace and, in particular, in tiine
of an armed attack on the Soviet Union.
In fulfilment of the .instructions of the enemy of the people
L. Trotsky, several .times received by Radek, and also personally
by Pyatakov during a meeting with the enemy of the people .L.
Trotsky, in December 1935 in the neighbourhood of the city of
Oslo, members of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite parallel centre, Pyatakov, Radek, Sokolniikov and Serebryakov developed wreeking,diversive, espionage and terrorist adivities.
Local Trotskyite centres were set up in certain large cities .in
the Soviet Union to exercise direct guidance of anti-Soviet activities
in the provinces. In particular, a West-Siberian anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre, consisting of N. I. MuraJov, M. S. Boguslavsky and
Y. N. Drobnis, accused in the present cas.e, ·was set up in Novosibirsk bn the direct instructions of Pyatakov.
Diversive and wrecking work in industry, chiefly in enterprises
of importance for defence purposes, and also on the railways, was
performed by the accused in the present ~ase al the behest of the
enemy of the people Trotsky, and on the instructions and with the
direct participation of agents of the German and Japanese intelligence services, and cons1sted in disrupting plans of production,
lowering the quality ·of product, .organizing tires and explosions
at factories or factory departments and mines, organizing train
wrecks a!'14 damaging rolling stock and railway track.
In organizing diversive activities, the accused were guided by
the instructions of the enemy of the people Trotsky "to strike :palpable blows at the most sensitive places," supplemented by directions from Pyatakov, Livshitz and Drobnis not. to shrink hefore
loss of human life, because, "the more victims, the better, since
this will rouse the.anger.of the workers."
:&15

In the chemical industry, the accused Rataichak and Pushin,
on the instructions of Pyatakov, performed wrecking work with
the object of disrupling the State production plan, delaying the
cc·m:truction of new factories and enterprises and spoiling the
quality of the construction work on new enterprises.
··
In addition, in 1934-1935, the accused Rataichak and Pushin
organized three diversive acts at the Gorlovka Nitrogen Fertilizer
Works, and two of them were accompanied by explOsions which
.caused the death of workers and heavy material loss.
Diversive acts were also organized at the instigation of the
accused Rataichak at the Voskressemk Combined Chemical
Works and the Nevsky Plant.
In the coal and chemical industries of the Kuznetsk Basin, the
accused Drobnis, Norkin, Shestov and Stroilov, on the instructions
of Pyatakov and Muralov, carried on wrecking and diversive work
with the object of disrupting the output of coal, delaying the building and development of new mines and chemical works, to create
conditions of work harmful and dangerous to the workers by allowing gas to accumulate in the galleries and pits, while on September 23, 1936, on the instructions of Drobnis, members of the
local Trotskyite organization caused an explosion at the Tsentralnaya Pit in the Kemerovo ·rn.ine, as a resull of which ten workers
lost their lives and 14 workers received grave injuries.
On .the railways, the diver~ive. ~rnd w.recking activities carried
on by the accused Serebryakov, Boguslavsky, Livshitz, Knyazev
and Turok in accordance with the stand of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre, aimed to disrupt the State plan of freight loading,
especially for the most important freight (coal, ore, grain), to
damage the rolling stock (cars and locomotives} and the railway
track, and to organize the wrecking of trains, especially of troop
trains.
At the instructions of Livshitz, and being commissioned therefore by an agent of the Japanese intelligence service, Mr. H--, the
accused Knyazev in 1935-1936 organized and brought about the
wrecking of a number of freight trains, passenger trains and troop
trains involving lo~s of life; as a result of the wreck of a troop
train at the Shumikha Station on October 27, 1935, 29 Red Army
men were killed and 29 Red Army men injured.
On the direct instructions of the enemy of the people Trotsky,
Pyatakov arid Serebryakov, members of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite
centre, made preparations, in the event of an armed attack on the
U.S.S.R., to carry out a number of diversive acts in industries of
importance .for defence purposes and also on important railway
·trunk lines.
On '111e .instructions of Pyata:kov, the acC'llsed Norkin made
576

preparations to set fire to the Kemerovo Chemical \Norks upon the
outbreak of war.
On the instru:etions of Livshitz, the accused Knyazev proceeded
to carry out the commission given him by Mr. H--, an agent
of the Japanese· intelligence service, to organize during war time
the blowing up of railway structures, the burning of military stores
and army provision bases, the wreck of troop trains, and also
the deliberate ~nfection .of trains designed for the transportation of
troops, provisfon supply depots and sanitary centres of the Workers' and- Peasants' Red Army with highly virulent bacilli.
In addition to diversive and wrecking activities, the accused
Livshitz,. Knyazev, Turok, Stroilov, Shestov, Rataichak, Pushin
and Hrasche, at the orders of the Trot~kyite anti-Soviet centre, engaged in securing and handing over secret information of utmost
State importance to agents of the German and Japanese intelligence
~rYices.

The accused Rataichak, Pushin and Hrascbe were connected
with agents of the German intelligence service, Meyerowitz and
Lenz, to whom, in 1935-1936, they handed over strictly secret
material relating to the condition and operation of chemical plants;
Pushin in 1935 handed over to Lenz, agent of the German intelligence service, secret information on the output of products by all
the chemical plants of the Soviet Union in 1934, the program of
work of all the chemical plants in 1935 and the plan for the construction of nitrogen works, while the accused Rataichak handed.
O'\.-er to the same Lenz absolutely secret material on the output in
1934 and the program of the work of chemical enterprises supplying the army for 1935.
The accused Shestov and Stroilov were connected with agents
of the Germ'.an intelligence service Schebesto, Flessa, Floren, Sommeregger and others, and handed over to lhem.secr~t information
about the coal and chemical industries of the Kuznetsk Basin.
The accused Livshitz, Knyazev and Turok regularly transmitted to Mr. H-.-, agent of the Japanese inteWgence service,
strictly secret information regarding the technical condition and
mobilization capacity of the railways of the U.S.S.R., and also
regard.J.ng transportation of troops.
At the direct behest of the enemy of the people L. Trotsky, the
anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre· formed several terrorist groups in
Moscow, Leningrad, Kiev~ Rostov, Novosibirsk, Soehl and other
cities of the U.S.S.R., which engaged in making preparations for
terrorist acts against the Ieaders of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union and the SovJet government, Comra<les Stalin, Molotov,
Kaganovich, Voroshilov, Orjonikidze, Yezhov, Zhdan-0v, Kossior,
Eiche, Postyshev and Beria; certain terrorist groups (in Moscow,
577

Novosibirsk, in the Ukraine and in Transcaucasia) were under the
person'.tl direction of the accused Pyatakov and Serebryakov, mem-bers of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre.
In organizing terrorist acts, the anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre
endeavoured to take advantage of visits paid to the provinces by
leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the Soviet
government.
_
Thus in the autumn of 1934, Shestov, at the behest of Mura]ov,
endeavoured to carry out a terrorist act against V. M. M-olotov,
Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of the U.S.S.R.,
during his visit to the Kuznetsk Basin, for which purpose a member
of the local Trotskyite terrorist group, the accused Arnold, attempted to cause an accident to the automobile in which Comrade
V. M. Molotov rode.
Furthermore, on the instructions of Pyatakov and Muralov, the
accused Shestov ma·de preparations for a terrorist act against R. I.
'Eiche, Secretary of the· West-Siberian Territory Committee of
:the C.P.S.U., while the accused Arnold at the instigation of Shestov
made preparations for a terrorist act against G. K. Orjonikidze. Thus the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the
U.S.S.R. has established that:
I. Pyafakov, Serebryakov, Radek and Sokolnikov were members of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre and, at the direct behest of
the enemy of the people L. Trot.sky, now abroad, with the
object of expediting an arnned attack on the Soviet Union, as:>isting foreign aggressors in seizing territory of the SoV'iet Union, ovt~r­
throwing the Soviet power .and restoring capitalism and the power
of the bourgeoisie, directed the trea~herons, diversive, wrecking,
espionage and terrorist activities of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite organization in the Soviet Union-i.e .. have committed crimes covered by Articles 58 1", 58 8 , 58 9 and 58 11 of the Criminal Code of the
R.S.F.S.R.
II. Pyatakov and Serebryakov, mentJoned in clause I, as well
as Muralov, Drobnis, Livshitz and Boguslavsky, members of an
_anti-Soviet Trotskyite organization, organized and personally directed the treasonable, espionage, dive'rsive and terrorist activities
of the members of ~he anti-Soviet Trotskyite organization-i.e.,
have committed crimes ·covered by Articles 581a, 588 , 589 and 5811
of the Criminal 'Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
III. Knyazev, 'Rataichak, Norkin, Shestov, Turok, Pushin and
Hrasche, while members of an a-nti-Soviet Trotskyite organization,
carried out the instructions of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre
concerning treasonable, espionage, undermining, wrecking and ter:rorisl ·activitie£-----i.e., have oommitted crimes covered by Articles
581", 588 , 589 and 5811 of the Criminal Code of the RS.F.S.R.
.li18

IV. Arnold, while a member of an anti-Soviet Trotsikyitc organization, .at the instigation of the accused Muralov and Shestov,
attempted to carry out terrorist acts against Comrades Molotov and
Orjonikidze-i.e., has committed crimes covered by Articles 19,
588 and 58 11 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
V. Stroilov partia<lly carried out certain individuall commissions for espionage and wrecking work-i.e., has committed crimes
covered by Articles 586_ and 58 7 of the Criminal Code of the
R.S.F.S.R.
'
On the basis of the above, and guided by Articles 319 and 320
of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the R.S.F~S.R.,
The Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SENTENCES:

1. Pyatakov, Yuri (Georgi) Leonidovich, ail!d
2. Serebryakov, Leonid Petrovich,
as members of the anti~Soviet Trotskyite centre who organized
and directly guided treasonable, espionage, undermining, wrecking
and terrorist activities, to the supreme penalty-to be 1Shot.
3. Muralov, Nikolai Ivanovich,
!. Drobnis, Yakov Naumovich,
5. Livshitz, Yakov Abramovich,
6. Boguslavsky, Mikhail Solomonovich,
7. Knyazev, Ivan Alexandrovich,
8. Rataichak, Stanislav Antonovich,
9. Norkin, Boris Osipovich,
10. Shestov, Alexei Alexandrovich,
11. Turok, Yosif Dmitrievich,
12. Pushin, Gavriil Yefremovich, and
13. Hrasche, Ivan Yosifovich,
as organizers and direct executors of the above-mentioned crimes,
to the supreme penalty-to be shot.
14. Sokolnikov, Gri.gori Ya1kovlevich, and
15. Radek, Karl Berngardovich,
.
as members of the anti-Soviet Trotskyite centre, responsible for
its criminal activities, but not directly participating in the organization and execution of acts of a diversive, wrecking, espionage and
terrorist nature each to imprhonment for a term of ten ye.ars.
16. Arnold, Valentin Volfridovich, alias Vasilyev, Valentin
Vasilyevich
to imprisonment for a term of ten years.
17. Stroilov, Mikhail Stepanovich,
in view of the facts mentioned in point V of the defining section/of
the present verdict-to imprisonment for a term of eight years.
579

Sokolnikov; Radek, Arnold and Stroilov, who are condemned
to impnison.ment, shall be ·deprived of political rights for a period
of five years each.
The personal prop-crty of all the condemned shall be confiscated.
··
Enemies of the people, Lev Davidovich Trotsky, and his son,
Lev Lvovich Sedov, who were in 1929 deported from the U.S.S.R.
and by the decision of the Central Executive Committee of the
U.S.S.R. of February 20, 1932, were deprived of citizenship of the
U.S.S.R., having been convicted hy the testimony of the accused
Y. L. Pyatakov, K. B. Radek, A, A. Shestov anci N. I. Muralov, and
by the evidence of V. G. Romm and.D. P. ,Bukhartsev, who were
examined as witnesses a1 the trial, 3!S well as by the materials in
the present case, of personally directing the treacherous activities
of the Trotskyite anti-Soviet centre, in the everit of their being
discovered on the territory of the U.S.S.R., are liable to immediate
arrest and trial by the Military Collegiurn ()!f the Supreme Court
of the U.S.S.R.
President:
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army .Military Jurist

President of the Military· Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
Members of the Court:
I. MATULEVICH
Army Corps Military Jurist
·[Signed]'
Vice-President of the Military Collegium
of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
N.RYCHKOV
Divisional Military Jurist

Member of the Military Collegium of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

The President: I declar.e the Court Session of the !Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the -u.S.S.R. closed.
·
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist

President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. KOSTYUSHKO
Military Jurist First Rank

