rEOPI,E'S COMMISSARIAT OF J'USTICE OF THE U.S.S.R.

REPORT OF COURT PROCEEDINGS
IN THE CASE OF THE

ANTI-SOVIET
"BLOC OF RIGHTS AND
TROTSKYITES"
lleard Be!ore The

MILITARY COLLEGIUM OF THE

SUPREME COURT OF THE U.S.S.R.
Moscow, March 2-13, 1938
IN RE:

N. I. Bukharin, A. I. Rykov, G. G. Yagoda, N. N. Krestinsky,
K. G. Rakovsky, .A. P. Rosengoltz, V. I. Ivanov, M. A. Chernov,
G. F. Grinko, I. A.. Zelensky, S. .A.. Bessonov, A. lkramov,
F. Khodjayev, V. F. Sharangovich, P. T. Zubarev, P. P. Bulanot',
L. G. Levin, D. D. Pletnev, I. N. Kazakov, V. A. Ma~imov-Dikovsky,
P. P. Kryuchkov
Charged with crimes covered by Articles ss 1a, 58 1 , 581 , 58 8 , 58'
and 5811 o[ the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R, and Ivanov,
Zelensky and Zubarev, in addition, with crimes covered
by Article 58'* of the Criminal Code of the R. S. F .S.R.

VERBATIM REPORT

•

Published by the

PEQPLE'6 COMMISSARIAT OF JUSTICE OF THE u.s.s.R.
MOSCOW 1938

This is a translation of the verbatim report of the proceedings of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the
U.S.S.R., March 2 to March 13, 1938, in the case of the nntiSoviet "Bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
Re the session of the Military Collegium of the Supreme
Court of the U.S.S.R. held in camera on March 9, 1938, this
volume contains a communication for the press approved by
the President of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court
of the U.S.S.R.

Prin.led in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republic$

B4l52l

CONTENTS
MORMNG SF.SSION, MAHCH 2
Opcmin1 of alle Trial • . . . . . . • .
I ndic&ment • . . . • . . . . . . . .
Examinaiion of ihe A.cc:used Beasonov .
1-:Vl<:NI!'\G SK~ION, MAHCH 2
E1'Qminadon of the Accused Grinko .
Examina•ion of che Accused Chernov
MORNI!'\G SF.SSION, MAUCH 3
E:camination of che Accused Ivanov .
EJCC1mination of che Acciaed Zubarev
J<:n:.'iING BESSION, MARCH 3
Examination of che Accused Krestinsky
E:camination of che Acciued Rykov
MORNING Sl':SSION, MARCH 4
E=mination of che Accused Sharangovich .
Examina&ion of she Acciued Khodjayev .
t-:VENING SF.SSION, MARCH 4
E!¥4mination of she Accused Ro.sensolt: . . . .
Second E"amination of she Accused Krestinsky
E"amina&ion of the Accu.sed Rakovsky . . . .
MORNING S1';58ION, MARCH 5
Examinaiion of she Accused Rakov.sky (Resumed)
E:caminadon of th.e Accused Zelensky . . . . . .
hVl-:NING SF.SSION, MARCH 5
Examination of &h.e Accused Ikramov
Examination of &lie Accused Bukharin
MORNING SESSION, MARCH 1
Examination of the Accused Bukharin (Resumed)
Examination of the WUne11 Yakovleva . . • . .
1':VENING SESSION, MARCH 1
E"4mination of the Wi&ness Yakovleva (Resumed) .
Examination of the Wi&nes1 Ossinsky .
~mina&ion of &he Witneas Manuev
E=mination of the Witness Kamkov
Examination of the Witness Karelin .
MORNING SESSION, MARCH 8
Examinaiion of the Accused Levin .

Page

1

5
38

67
88
110

138
152
158
200

212

244
262
287
293
314
339
369
393

439

453
458
466
484
496
513

EVENING SESSION, MARCH 8
552
Examination of the Accused Bulanov
568
Examination of the Accused Yagoda
584
Examina!ion of the Accused Kryuchkov .
MORNING SESSION, MARCH 9
• . • . . . • 590
Examination of the Accused Pletnev . .
Examination of the Accused Kazakov . . . • . . . . • · • 597
Answers of the Commission of Medical Experts to the Ques·
tions Submitted by the State Prosecutor . • • . . • . 608
Examination of the Accused Maximov·Dikovsky • • . . . • 611
Examination of the Witness Dr. Belostotsky • . . . . • . • 616
Answers of the Commission of Medical Expert! to the Ques •
tions Submitted by the State Prosecutor . • • • • . . 618
EV.ENIN('.; SESSION, MARCH 9
624
Session in camera . . . . . . . . . . . • .
MORNING SESSION, MARCH 11
Speech for the Prosecution by A. Y. Vyshinsky, Procurator
of the U.S.S.R. . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . 625
EVENING SESSION, MARCH lJ.
698
Speech for the Defence by I. D. Braude . •
705
Speech for the Defence by N. V. Kommodov
7J.5
. Last Plea of the Accused Bessonov •
718
Last Plea of the Accused Grinko .
721
Last Plea of the Accused Chernov
MORNING SESSION, MA:RCH •12
726
Last Plea of the Accused Ivanov • •
730
Last Plea of the Accused Krestinsky
736
Last Plea of the Accused Zubarev . . .
787
Last Plea of the Accused Rykov • . . .
741
Last Plea of the Accused Sharangovich .
743
Last Plea of the Accus1>d Khodjayev
748
Last Plea of the Accused Zelensky .
Last Plea of the Accused lkramov .
754
Last Plea of the Accused Rakovsky .
758
Last Plea of the Accused Rosengoltz
764
EVENING SESSION, MARCH il.2
Last Plea of the Accused Bukharin .
767
Last Plea of the Accused Levin . .
779
Last Plea of the Acc~sed Bulanov .
18.2
Last Plea of the Accused Yagoda . .
784
Last Plt1a of the Acc1.1sed Kryuchkov
787
Last Plea of the Accused PletIJ.ev . ,
787
Last Plea of the Accused Kazakov . . . . .
788
Last Plea of the Accused Maximov·Dikovsky
790
The JI erdfot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • .

792

REPORT OF COURT PROCEEDINGS

COMPOSITION OF THE COURT
PRESIDENT:

.A,rmy Military Jurist

V. V. ULRICH
President of the Military Collegium of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.U.
MEMBERS OF THE COURT:

Army Corps Military Jurist

I. 0. MATULEVICH
Vice-President of the Military Collegium of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

Divisional Military Jurist

B. I. YEVLEV
Member of the Military Collegium of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

Military Jurist of First ,Rank

A.A.BATNER
STATE PROSECUTOR:

A. Y. VYSHINSKY
THE DEFENCE:

I. D. BRAUDE

N. V. KOMMODOV

Members of the
Moscow Collesium of Defence

MORNING SESSION, MARCH 2, 1938

COMMANDANT Of THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRES ID ENT: Be seated. I declare the session of the
Military Co llegi um of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. open.
The trial is of Nikolai Ivanovich BUKHARIN, Alexei Ivanovich RYKOV, Genrikh Grigorievich YAGODA, Nikolai Nikolaycvich KRESTINSKY, Khristian Ocorgievich RAKOVSKY,
Arkady Pavlovich ROSENGOLTZ, Vladimir Ivanovich IVANOV,
Mikhail Alexandrovich CHERNOV, Grigori Fedorovich GRINKO,
Isaac Abramovich ZELENSKY, Sergei Alexeyevich BESSONOV,
Akmal IKRAMOV, Faizulla KHODJAYEV, Vasily Fomich
SHARANGOVICH, Prokopy Timofeyevich ZUBAREV, Pavel
Petrovich BULANOV, Lev Grigorievich LEVIN, Dmitry Dmitrievich PLETNEV, Ignaty Nikolayevich KAZAKOV, Venyamin
Adamoviclt MAXIMOV, and Pyotr Petrovich KRYUCHKOV on
charges of treason to the country, espionage, committing acts of
di version, terrorism, wrecking, undermining the military power
of tile U.S.S.R. and of provoking a military attack of foreign states
upon the U.S.S.R., i.e., of crimes covered by Articles 581 a., 58 9,
58 7, 58 8, 58 9 and 5811 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
Accused Bukharin, Nikolai Ivanovich, have you received
a copy of the indictment?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rykov, Alexei Ivanovich, have
you received a copy of the indictment?
RYKOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Yagoda, Genrikh Grigorievich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
YAGO DA: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Krestinsky, Nikolai Nikolayevicl!, have you received a copy of the indictment?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rakovsky, Khristiah Georgievich,
haw you received a copy of the indictment?
I~AKOVSKY: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rosengoltz, Arkady Pavlovich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?

ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Ivanov, Vladimir Ivanovich~
have you received a copy of the indictment?
IVANOV: I have received a copy of the indictment.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Chernov, Mikhail Alexandrovich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
CHERNOV: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Grinko, Grigori Fedorovich, have
you received a copy of the indictment?
GRINKO: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zelensky, Isaac Abramovich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
ZELENSKY: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bessonov, Sergei Alexeyevich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
BESSONOV: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused lkramov, Akmal, have you received a copy of the indictment?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Khodjayev, Faizulla, have you
received a copy of the indictment?
KHODJAYEV: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Sharangovich, Vasily Fomich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
SHARANGOVICH: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zubarev, Prokopy Timofeyevich.
have you received a copy of the indictment?
ZUBAREV: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bulanov, Pavel Petrovich, have
you received a copy of the indictment?
BULANOV: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Levin, Lev Grigorievich, have
you received a copy of the indictment?
LEVIN: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Pletnev, Dmitry Dmitrievich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
PLETNEV: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Kazakov, Ignaty Nikolayevich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
KAZAKOV: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Maximov, Venyamin Adamovich,
your real name is Dikovsky. Venyamin Adamovich, alias Abramovich?
MAXIMOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you received a copy of the indictment?
2

MAXIMOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Kryuchkov, Pyotr Petrovich,
have you received a copy of the indictment?
KRYUCHKOV: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: I announce the compol'ition of the Court
in this case: President-Army Military jurist V. V. Ulrich,
President of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the
U.S.S.R.; Members of the Court-Army Corps Military Jurist
I. O. Matulevich, Vice-president of the Military Collegium; Divisional Military Jurist B. I. Yevlev; and Reserve Member of
the Court-Brigade Military jurist I. M. Zyryanov.
The prosecution is conducted by the Procurator of the U.S.S.R.,
A. Y. Vyshinsky.
The following are Defending Counsel: for accused LevinMember of the Collegium of Defence Braude; for accused Pletnev
and Kazakov-Member of the Collegium of Defence Kommodov;
the other accused, asked, when the investigation was concluded,
whether they needed Counsel for Defence, declined and said that
they would defend themselves.
I repeat the question about defence:
Accused Bukharin, do you desire to have Counsel for Defence?
BUKHARIN: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rykov, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
RYKOV: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Yagoda, do you <lesire to have
Counsel for Defence?
YAGODA: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Krestinsky, do you desire to
have Counsel for Defence?
KRESTINSKY: No, I will defend myself.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rakovsky, do you desire to
have Counsel for Defence?
RAKOVSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rosengoltz, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
ROSENGOLTZ: No.
THE PRES ID ENT: Accused Ivanov, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
IVANOV: No, I do not need Counsel, I do not intend to defend
myself. I am here to bear full responsibility for my crimes.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Chernov, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
CHERNOV: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Grinko, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
3

GRlNKO: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zelensky, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
ZELENSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bessonov, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
BESSONOV: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Ikramov, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
IKRAMOV: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Khodjayev, do you desire to
have Counsel for Defence?
KHODJAYEV: No.
THE PRES !DENT: Accused Sharangovich, do you desire
to have Counsel for Defence?
SHARANGOVICH: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zubarev, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
ZUBAREV: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bulanov, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
BULANOV: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Maximov, do you desire to have
Counsel for Defence?
MAXIMOV: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Kryuchkov, do you desire to
have Counsel for Defence?
KRYUCHKOV: No.
THE PRESIDENT: I must explain to the accused who have
declined Counsel for Defence that, in addition to their last pleas,
they have the right to make speeches in defence.
I must explain to all the accused that they have the right
to put questions to each other and to give explanations on any
point in the Court investigation.
Comrade Procurator, ·have you any request to make in respect
to the calling of supplementary witnesses in the case, or in respect
to the inclusion of any supplementary documents in the case?
VYSHINSKY: Not so far, but in accordance with the Code
Qf Criminal Procedure I have the right at any moment in the course
of the Court proceedings to request that witnesses be called and
that supplementary documents be included in the case. I ask that
this right be reserved for me.
THE PRESIDENT: Certainly. Have Counsel for Defence any
requests?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE: (Reply in the negative.)
4

THE PRESIDENT: Have the accused any statement to make
in respect to the calling of witnesses or inclusion of documents?
No. We will now hear the indictment.
(The Secretary of the Court reads the indictment.)
INDICTMENT
in the case of N. I. BUKHARIN, A. I. RYKOV, G. G. YAGODA,
N. N. KRESTINSKY, K. G. RAKOVSKY, A. P. ROSENGOLTZ,
V. I. IVANOV, M.A.CHERNOV, 0. f.GRINKO, I.A.ZELENSKY,
S. A. BESSONOV, A. IKRAMOV, F. KHODJAYEV, V. F. SHARANGOVICH, P. T. ZUBAREV, P. P. BULANOV, L. G. LEVIN, D. D. PLETNEV, I. N. KAZAKOV, V. A. MAXIMOVDIKOVSKY and P. P. KRYUCHKOV, accused of having on
the instructions of the intelligence services of foreign states hostile
to the Soviet Union formed a conspiratorial group named the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites" with the object of espiom1ge on behalf
of foreign states, wrecking, diversionist and terrorist activities,
undermining the military power of the U.S.S.R., provoking a
military attack by these states on the U.S.S.R., dismembering the
U.S.S.R. and severing from it the Ukraine, Byelorussia, the
Central Asiatic Republics, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and the
Maritime Region of the Far East for the benefit of the aforementioned foreign states, and lastly, with the object of overthrowing
the Socialist social and state system existing in the U.S.S.R. and
of restoring capitalism, of restoring the power of the bourgeoisie.
The investigation instituted by the organs of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs has established that on the instructions of the intelligence services of foreign states hostile to the
U.S.S.R. the accused in the present case organized a conspiratorial
group named the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," the object of
which was to overthrowthe Socialist social and state system existing
in the U.S.S.R., to restore capitalism and the power of the bourgeoisie in the U.S.S.R., to dismember the U.S.S.R. and to sever
from it for the benefit of the aforementioned states the Ukraine,
Byelorussia, the Central Asiatic Republics, Georgia, Armenia,
Azerbaijan and the Maritime Region.
The investigation has established that the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" united within its ranks underground anti-Soviet groups
of Trotskyites, Rights, Zinovievites, Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and bourgeois nationalists of the Ukraine, Byelorussia,
Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and the Central Asiatic Republics,
which is corroborated by the materials not only of the present
investigation, but also by the materials of the trials which have
taken place in various parts of the U.S.S.R., and, in particular,
the trial of the group of military conspirators-TUKHACHEVSKY
5

and others-who were convicted by a Special Session of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. on June I I, 1937, and of the
trial of the Georgian bourgeois nationalist group of MDIVANI,
OKUDJAVA and others, who were convicted by the Supreme
Court of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic on July
9, 1937.
Lacking all support within the U.S.S.R., the members of the
"bloc of Riohts and Trotskyites" in their struggle against the Socialist social a~d state system existing in the U.S.S.R. and for seizing
power placed all their hopes exclusively upon the armed assistance of foreign aggressors, who promised the conspirators this
assistance on the condition that the U.S.S.R. was to be dismembered and that the Ukraine, the Maritime Region, Byelorussia, the Central Asiatic Republics, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan were to be severed from the U.S.S.R.
This agreement between the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and
the representatives of the aforementioned foreign states was facilitated by the fact that many of the leading participants of this
conspiracy had long been agents of foreign intelligence services
and had for many· years carried on espionage activities on behalf
of these intelligence services.
This applies first of all to one of the inspirers of the conspiracy, enemy of the people TROTSKY. His connection with the
Gestapo was exhaustively proved at the trials of the TrotskyiteZinovievite Terrorist Centre in August 1936, and of the AntiSoviet Trotskyite Centre in January 1937.
However, the materials in the possession of the investigating
authorities in the present case establish that the connections between enemy of the people TROTSKY and the German political
police and the intelligence services of other countries were established at a much earlier date. The investigation has definitely
established that TROTSKY has been connected with the German
intelligence service since 1921, and with the British Intelligence
Service since 1926.
As far as the accused in the present case are concerned, a considerable number of them, on their own confession, have been
espionage agents of foreign intelligence services for a long period
of time.
Thus, the accused N. N. KRESTINSKY, on the direct instructions of enemy of the people TROTSKY, entered into treasonable
connections with the German intelligence service in 1921.
The accused A. P. ROSENGOLTZ, one of the leaders of the
. Trotskyite underground organization, began his espionage work
for the German General Staff in 1923, and for the British Intelligence Service in 1926.
The accused K. G. RAKOVSKY, one of L. Trotsky's most inti6

mate and particularly trusted men, has been an agent of the Britislil
intelligence Service since 1924, and of the Japanese intelligence
service since 1934.
The accused M. A. CHERNOV began his espionage work on behalf of Germany in 1928, when he established connections with the
German intelligence service on the initiative and with the assistance
of the notorious emigre Menshevik DAN.
The accused V. F. SHARANGOVICH was enlisted by the Polish
intelligence service and was sent on espionage work to the U.S.S.R.
in 1921.
The accused G. F. GRINKO became a spy of the German and
Polish intelligence services in I 932.
The leaders of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," including
RYKOV, BUKHARIN and others accused in the present case,
were fully informed of the espionage connections of their accomplices and did everything to encourage the expansion of these
espionage connections.
All this sufficiently explains why these gentlemen, being in
the service of foreign intelligence services, so readily agreed to
the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R. and to the severance of whole
regions and republics from it for the benefit of foreign states.
Agreement between the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and foreign intelligence services was also facilitated by the fact that several
of the conspirators accused in the present case had been provocateurs and agents of the tsarist secret police.
Having wormed their way into responsible posts in the Soviet
state, these provocateurs, however, never ceased to fear the exposure
-0f the crimes they had committed against the working class,
.against the cause of Socialism. Constantly in fear of exposure, these
participants in the conspiracy saw their only hope of safety in the
·overthrow of the Soviet power, in the destruction of the Soviet
system and in the restoration of the power of the landlords
and capitalists, in whose interests they had sold themselves to the
tsarist secret police, and under whose rule alone they could feel
-safe.
Thus, the accused I. A. ZELENSKY had been an agent of the
Samara Gendarme Administration since 1911. From that time
onwards ZELENSKY, under the pseudonyms of "Ochkasty"
and "Salaf," systematically informed the Gendarme Admi~­
istration about the activities of the Samara Bolshevik orgamzation, for which he received a regular monthly monetary remuneration.
The accused IVANOV began his provocateur activities in
1911, when he was enlisted for this purpose by the Tula Secret
Police and became an agent of the secret police under the pseudonym of "Samarin."
7

The accused ZUBAREV was enlisted by the tsarist police in
1908 and worked for them under the pseudonyms of "Vasily,"

"Palin," and "Prokhor."
As the investigation has established, for the purpose of achieving their criminal object of overthrowing the Soviet government,
of seizing power and restoring capitalism in the U.S.S.R., the
conspirators, on the direct instructions of the foreign intelligence
services, carried on extensive espionage work on behalf of these
intelligence services, organized and carried on wrecking and diversion activities with the object of bringing about the defeat of
the U.S.S.R. in the forthcoming attack upon the U.S.S.R. by
the fascist aggressors, did their utmost to provoke the acceleration of this attack of the fascist aggressors, and also organized and
carried out a number of terrorist acts against the leaders of the
Party and the government and prominent Soviet public men.
I. ESPIONAGE AGAINST THE SOVIET STATE AND
TREASON TO THE COUNTRY

The investigation has established that the majority of the
leaders of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" accused in the present
case carried on their criminal activities on the direct instructions of
TROTSKY and in accordance with plans which were widely conceived and elaborated by the General Staffs of certain foreign
states.
Agent of the German intelligence service, prominent Trotskyite, the accused KRESTINSKY, while under examination at the
office of the Procurator of the U.S.S.R. on December 2, 1937,
stated:

"l established espionage connections with the Germans
on the direct instructions of TROTSKY, who instructed me to
start negotiations on this matter with General SEECKT.... "
(Vol. III, p. 102.)
As regards the circumstances under which connections between the Trotskyite organization and the German intelligence
service were establishedt the accused KRESTINSKY testified that
in the winter of 1921 he carried on negotiations with General
SEECKT, Commander-in-Chief of the German Reichswehr, with
a view to receiving from the Reichswehr funds for the purpose of
carrying on Trotskyite underground work in exchange for espionage
materials which the Trotskyites were to supply the German intelligence service.
On this matter the accused KRESTINSKY testified as follows:
8

" ... TROTSKY instructed me on my arrival in Berlin.
to start negotiations on this matter with General SEECKT.
This instruction of TROTSKY'S I carried out. ... "
(Vol. III, p. 14 reverse.)
Dealing with his own treasonable activities and with thoseof his accomplices, the accused KRESTINSKY testified as follows::
"We came to an agreement with Generals SEECKT and
HASSE to the effect that we would help the Reichswehr to
create a number of espionage bases on the territory of the
U.S.S.R. by permitting the unhindered entry of spies sent
by the Reichswehr, and that we would supply the Reichswehr
with espionage materials, i.e., to put it plainly, that we
would be German spies. In return for this the Reichswehr undertook to pay us 250,000 marks per annum as a subsidy for
counter-revolutionary Trotskyite work.... "
(Vol. III, p. 102.)
"The monetary subsidy was paid in regular instalments
times a year, mostly in Moscow, but sometimes in
Berlin ....
"If for some reason the money was not paid in Moscow,
I received it in Berlin myself directly from SEECKT; and
I used to take it to Moscow myself and hand it to TROTSKY.,,.
(Vol. III, p. 15.)
Another prominent Trotskyite, one of the leaders of the antiSoviet Trotskyite underground organization and an active participant in the conspiracy, the accused ROSENGOLTZ, who is
charged with espionage, during the investigation corroborated the
fact that TROTSKY had entered into an agreement with the
Reichswehr and testified as follows:
sev~al

"My espionage activities began as far back as 1923, when,
on TROTSKY'S instructions, I handed various secret information to the Commander-in-Chief of the Reichswehr, SEECKT,
and to the Chief of the German General Staff, HASSE. Subsequently, direct connections with me were established by the
-· . Ambassador in the U.S.S.R., Mr. N, to whom I periodically
gave information of an espionage character. After Mr. N's.
departure I continued my espionage connections with the
new Ambassador, Mr. N." · _ (Vol. VI, p. 131 reverse.)
After the fascist coup in Germany, the espionage activities of
the Trotskyites assumed a still wider and sharply expressed defeatist character.
The accused BESSONOV, who on his own confession took an
active part in the secret negotiations between the Trotskyites and.

9

the German fascist, mainly military, circles, on the matter of
jointly fighting the U.S.S.R., not only personally negotiated for
support for the anti-Soviet conspiracy with DAITZ, ROSENBERG_'S
.closest colleague in the foreign affairs department of the fascist
party, but was kept informed of the meetings and negotiations
between L. TROTSKY and HESS, NIEDERMEIER and Professor HAUSHOFER, with whom L. TROTSKY reached an agreement on the terms mentioned by PYAT AKOV at the trial of the
Anti-Soviet Trotskyite Centre.
The accused BESSONOV testified:
" ... As is evident from these terms ... the main emphasis
in the underground work of the Trotskyites was placed on
undermining, espionage, diversion and terrorist acts in the

u.s.s.R."

(Vol. XI, p. 106.)

The existence of an agreement between L. TROTSKY and the
Trotskyite organization in the U.S.S.R., on the one hand, and
the fascist circles, on the other, and the carrying on in the U.S.S.R.
of undermining defeatist activities on the instructions of,;he German intelligence service was admitted during the inv...:.,tigation
by other accused in the present case.
However, the defeatist activities of the Trotskyite hirelings
were not limited merely to connections with German fascism. In
conjunction with other participants in the anti-Soviet conspiracy, in conformity with L. TROTSKY'S line, they orientated themselves also on another fascist aggressor-Japan.
The factual side of the treasonable connections of the anti'Soviet conspirators with the Japanese intelligence service is presented in the materials of the investigation in the following way.
As was testified by the accused KRESTINSKY, at a meeting
he had with L. TROTSKY in Meran in October 1933, TROTSKY
urged the necessity of establishing closer connections with the
Japanese intelligence service.
KRESTINSKY conveyed TROTSKY'S instructions to PYATAKOV and other leaders of the conspiracy, who through the me di um
·Of the accused RAKOVSKY and other participants in the conspiracy entered into treasonable connections with representatives of
japan, the latter undertaking to render the conspiracy armed
assistance in overthrowing the Soviet government, in exchange
for which the conspirators promised to surrender the Soviet Maritime Region to japan.
As has been established by the investigation, the accused RAKOVSKY, in view of his departure for japan in the summer of
1934, received from PYATAKOV instructions to the effect that it
was
10

" ... necessary at the same time to increase activities abroad
in the sense of establishing contact with governments hostile
to the U.S.S.R ...• necessaryto make efforts to take advantaO'e
of the visit to Tokyo and probably--wi 11 take the necessa~y
steps in this direction."
(Vol. IV, p. 194.)
The accused RAKOVSKY carried out this instruction, and
while in Tokyo did indeed enter into criminal connections with-·
circles.
On this matter the accused RAKOVSKY testified as follows:
"All these circumstances had as their logical and practical consequence the fact that I ... when I was in Tokyo became a direct spy-agent of--, being enlisted for this purpose,
on the instructions of--, by Mr. N, a most influential political figure in capitalist-feudal japan, and one of her biggest
plutocrats."
(Vol. IV, p. 186.)
The aforementioned accused RAKOVSKY, speaking of the
connections of enemy of the people L. TROTSKY with the British
Intelligence Service, testified as follows:
"I knew that TROTSKY has been an agent of the Intelligence Service since the end of 1926. TROTSKY himself informed me of it."
(Vol. IV, p. 363.)
The groups of bourgeois nationalists which belonged to the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" were also very closely connected
wHh foreign intelligence services.
Thus, the accused GRINKO, who was an agent of the German
and Polish intelligence services, in dealing with the anti-Soviet
activities of the Ukrainian national-fascist organization of which
he was one of the leaders, testified as follows:
" ... In 1930, we in our organization discussed the necessity of coming to an agreement with Poland about obtaining military assistance for an insurrection in the Ukraine
against the Soviet government. As a result of these negotiations
with Poland an agreement was reached and the Polish General Staff increased the quantity of arms and the number of
diversionists and PETLIURA emissaries sent to the Ukraine."
(Vol. IX, p. 18.)
And he said further:
"At the end of 1932 I, in connection with my nationalist
activities, entered into treasonable connections with Mr. N.
We met in my office, where Mr. N used to come to see me on
business concerning a German concession.
·
"In the latter half of 1933 Mr. N told me plainly that the
11

German fascists wanted to co-operate with the Ukrainian
nationalists on the Ukrainian question. I expressed to Mr. N
my readiness to co-operate. Subsequently, duri~g 1933 and
1934, I met Mr. N several times, and before his departure
from the U.S.S.R. he put me in touch with Mr. N, with whom
I continued my treasonable connections."
(Vol. IX, p. 286 reverse.)
Another participant in the anti-Soviet conspiracy, and one
of the leaders of the nationalist organization in Uzbekistan, the
accused IKRAMOV, testified as follows:
"The question constantly arose before us of orientating
ourselves upon one of the strong European states, which would
render us direct assistance at the outbreak of the armed
struggle against the Soviet power. ... "
(Vol. XII, pp. 59-60.)
" ... Some of the members of the counter-revolutionary
organization were of the opinion that England was the most
likely country in regard to helping us, as she was a powerfut
country and could render us sufficiently effective assistancEf
in the direct armed struggle .... "
(Vol. XII, p. 60.) (
The accused SHARANGOVICH, agent of the Polish intelligence service and one of the leaders of the anti-Soviet organizal
tion of Byelorussian national-fascists, has admitted that this or"
ganization pursued its undermining activities not only on the instructions of the Rights and the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,
but also on the instructions of the Polish intelligence service. ~
On this matter the accused SHARANGOVICH testified as
follows:
"By this time (1933) all differences between the Rights;:
the Trotskyites and the national-fascists had been irone~
out. We. all set ourselves the same task, the task of fighting
the S?v1et ~over.nment by eve.ry possible method, includin~
terrorism, diversion and wrecking. The ultimate object of alJ
three organizations operating in the territory of the natio!l/I
al republic was to sever Byelorussia from the Soviet Uniot1f;
and to create an 'independent' buffer state, which undoubtedly would have been entirely in the hands of Poland anc0
Germany...• "
(Vol. XIV, p. 27.)
And he said further:

'1

"Notwithstanding the fact that the instructions we received came from Moscow, from the centre of the Rights and
Trotskyites, on the one hand, and from Warsaw, from Polish
12

- circles, on the other, there was no difference between them,
they were exactly the same, and we were carrying them out."
(Vol. XIV, p. 31.)
The accused RYKOV fully corroborated the existence of treasonable connections between the Rights and fascist Poland in the
following testimony:
." ... A group of members of the Right organization, in
conformity with the instructions of the centre of the Rights
and my personal instructions, with the object of achieving our
conspiratorial, treasonable plans, established connection with
fascist Poland, and with the Polish intelligence service in
particular."
(Vol. I, p. 118.)
Speaking further of the plans to sever Byelorussia from the
U.S.S·.R., the accused RYKOV testified as follows:
"The general formula on which we then agreed was that
in the negotiations with the Poles ... we would agree to the
severance of the Byelorussian Soviet Republic from the U.S.S.R.
and to the formation of an 'independent' Byelorussia as a
Polish protectorate .... "
(Vol. I, p. 119.)
As has been established by the investigation, the whole of the
·-criminal activities of the anti-Soviet group of Rights which be•longed to the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" proves that the
,Rights were agents of foreign General Staffs equally with the other
.!participants in this conspiracy.
· Some of the Rights directly, and others through the medium
.of their accomplices, were also connected with the intelligence
services of foreign states, on whose assistance alone they counted
In their fight against the Soviet government.
The accused BUKHARIN was aware of the negotiations car·ried on between L. TROTSKY and the German fascists and, like
L. TROTSKY, made preparations for the defeat of the U.S.S.R.
·and for the severance of the Ukraine, Byelorussia, the Maritime
"Region, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and th~ Central Asiatic Re·.publics from the U.S.S.R.
This has been fully admitted by the accused BUKHARIN, who
'ltestified as fo !lows:
"At the time TROTSKY was negotiating with the German fascists and promising them territorial concessions, we
Rights were already in a bloc with the Trotskyites. RADEK
told me that TROTSKY considered that the main chance of
the bloc coming into power depended upon the defeat of
the U.S.S.R. in a war with Germany and Japan and that he
1

13

proposed after this defeat to surrender the Ukraine to Germany and the Far East to japan. RADEK told me this in
1934.... "
(Vol. V, p. 107.)
On this matter the accused F. KHODJAYEV testified as follows during the investigation:
"BUKHARIN urged that Uzbekistan and Turkmenia
should be severed from the U.S.S.R. and should exist as protectorates of japan and Germany; but it would be impossible
to ignore England, and it was therefore necessary to establish connection with the English. The most feasible proposal
was a British protectorate, and that is why stress was laid on
England."
(Vol. XI II, pp. 89-89 reverse.)
The testimony of the accused F. KHOD JAYEV is fully corroborated· by other materials of the investigation, which fully expose
the defeatist line of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
Thus, on this point the accused RYKOV testified as follows:
"As for our defeatist position, BUKHARIN fully agreed
with it and expressed himself in its favour even more
strongly than we did. In particular, it was he who proposed
and formulated the idea of opening the front to the Germans
in the event of war."
(Vol. I, p. 152.)
Characterizing his own attitude towards this question, the
accused RYKOV testified as follows:
"Like the other members of the Rights' centre, I was
aware of the treasonable negotiations that were being carried on between the representatives of our counter-revolutionary organization and the German fascists, whose assistance
we sought. Naturally, this assistance was dependent upon
our making concessions to the German fascists, and to this
we agreed."
(Vol. I, p. 151 reverse.)
Such were the espionage and defeatist activities of the ubloc of
Rights and Trotskyites" of these traitors who so Id Soviet state
secrets to foreign intelligence services, who traded in the freedom
of the peoples of the U.S.S.R., in the independence and inviolability of the workers' and peasants' Socia list states.
In pursuit of their criminal designs, the anti-Soviet conspirators, on the direct instructions of foreign fascist intelligence
services, organized a wide network of diversionist and wreckincr
nests in a number of industrial, transport, agricultural and dis~
tributing enterprises in various republics, territories and regions
of the Soviet Union.
Entering into an agreement with the fascist circles treacherously to open our fronts to the armies of these fascist states in the
14

event of war, the participants in the Right and Trotskyite conspiracy
prepared to undermine the material and technical base of the
Red Army-the defence industry.
By preparing for a number of destructive and diversionist activities, the conspirators counted in the event of war on blowing up
and destroying the decisive defence enterprises in our Socialist
fatherland. They also made preparations to wreck troop-trains,
causing great loss of life.
.
They set themselves the task of paralysing the whole economic
life of the country, of paralysing the food and munition supplies
of the army.
The investigation has established that the conspirators actually carried out a number of diversionist and wrecking acts of
this kind in various branches of national economy.
As has been established by the investigation, that hireling of
foreign intelligence services, enemy of the people TROTSKY, in
a number of his letters and personal instructions to the leading
participants in the anti-Soviet conspiracy in the U.S.S.R., demanded the intensification of wrecking and diversionist activities
in the Soviet Union.
The accused KRESTINSKY, a leading participant in the conspiracy, testified that in 1933, in Meran, L. TROTSKY told him
personally that
" ... it would be easier for him, TROTSKY, to negotiate
with the Germans if he could tell them that really serious
work was being carried on in the way of diversionist and
wrecking activities and preparation for terrorism."
(Vol. III, pp. 54-55.)
The investigation has established that a number of diversionist acts committed in the Far Eastern Territory were planned and
carried out by the participants in this anti-Soviet conspiracy on
the direct instructions of the Japanese intelligence service and
of enemy of the people L. TROTSKY. Thus, on the instructions of·
the Japanese intelligence service they organized the wreck of a
military freight train at Volochayevka Station, and the wreck of
train No. 501 on the Khor-Dormidontovka section, in which 21
persons were killed and 45 injured. In conformity with the same
Japanese instructions, acts of diversion were committed in pits
(Vol. XLV, pp. 1-14.)
No. 10 and 20 in Suchan.
Detailed testimony on similar instructions emanating from
L. TROTSKY has been given by the accused ROSENGOLTZ, who
stated the following:

"In addition to instructions I received from TROTSKY
through KRESTINSKY and SEDOV to carry on wrecking acti15

vities in the sphere of foreign trade with the object of rendering direct assistance to Germany and Japan, t~e char~cter
of my wrecking activities was also de~ermined by instructions
I received from the-Ambassadors in the U.S.S.R., Mr. N
and Mr. N, connections with whom played an important part
in this matter, as I had to be guided in my work by their
definite instructions.
"After I had established contact with TUKHACHEVSKY
and RYKOV I informed the former through KRESTINSKY,
and the Iatt~r I myself informed, of TROTSKY'S instructions regarding wrecking activities, and both approved of the
work I had done.
"As the result of all this, wrecking activities in foreign
trade proceeded mainly along the following three lines:
first-economic assistance to Germany and japan at the expense of the U.S.S.R.; second-causing economic loss and
damage to the U.S.S.R.; third-causing political damage
(Vol. VI, p. 49.)
to the U.S.S.R."
On the instructions of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites ~' the
;accused SHARANGOVICH carried on extensive wrecking activities
-in agriculture and industry in the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist
'.Republic.
On this matter the accused SHARANGOVICH testified as
follows:
·
"For the purpose of putting our wrecking designs into
effect we created in the local districts a network of wrecking
and diversionist groups ..•. All of us, from the leaders of the
organization down to the rank-and-file members, were national-fascists and carried on activities against the Soviet government for severing Byelorussia from the U.S.S.R., sticking
at nothing in our efforts .... "
(Vol. XIV, p. 40.)
The accused CHE RN OV, who for a number of years has been con·nected with the German intelligence service as one of its secret agents
-in the U.S.S.R., also took active advantage of the high official
position he occupied in the U.S.S.R. to organize, on the instructions of the German intelligence service, a number of diversionist and wrecking acts in the sphere of agriculture.
The accused CHERNOV, a German spy, giving testimony on
his criminal connections with the German spy SCHEFFER, the
-correspondent of the "Berliner Tageblatt," and on his wrecking
.activities in the sphere of agriculture, stated the following:
"When I went to work at the Committee of Agricultural Stocks
SCHEFFER conveyed to me the instructions of the Germans
16

1o cal'ry on wrecking activities in the sphere of operations ot
the Committee of Agricultural Stocks, particularly in reO'arcl
to mobilization reserves.
:,..
"The wrecking instructions I received from the intelligence service coincided with those which I, as a member of
the Right organization, had received from RYKOV. All the
more ready was I, therefore, to carry them out."
(Vol. VII I, pp. 98 reverse, 25.)
In respect to this, CHERNOV testified as follows:
"In 1934 I met RYKOV at his country house and he gave
me instructions to carry on wrecking activities on a wide
scale in the sphere of agriculture. I carried out these instructions and pursued wrecking and undermining activities
(Vol. VIII, p. 93.)
fairly actively."
The investigation has revealed considerable undermining
wrecking activities in the sphere of agriculture also in Uzbekistan, where the nationalist organizations, which, through their
leaders, the accused IKRAMOV and KHODJAYEV, were in
alliance with the centre of the anti-Soviet conspiracy, operated.
The accused FAIZULLA KHODJAYEV, one of the leaders of
this nationalist organization, testified as follows:
"We did not confine ourselves only to preparing cadres
for our armed struggle against the Soviet power; we were
already actively working with the object of undermining the
(Vol. XIII, p. 66.)
power of the U.S.S.R."
The extensive application of wrecking measures in Uzbekistan
was also fully corroborated by the accused IKRAMOV, who testified that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" had set him the
following tasks:
" ... a) to make extensive preparations in Uzbekistan for
armed insurrection, to be started simultaneously with the
beginning of intervention;
"b) vigorously to carry on wrecking and diversionist operations in all branches of the national economy with a view
to their consequences rousing among the toilers discontent
with the Soviet power and thus creating favourable ground
for the organization of armed insurrection at the proper moment.''
"In addition to 'this," the accused IKRAMOV stated, "the
object of our wrecking activities was to hinder the· strengthening of the defence of the U.S.S.R." (Vol. XII, pp. 95-96.)
Wrecking activities in agriculture as well as in a number of
other branches of the national economy and Socialist construction
were also carried on by other accused in the present case.
2

17

Thus, the accused GRINKO pursued wrecking activities in
the sphere of finance.
The accused GRINKO testified as follows:
"The main object of undermining work in the People's
Commissariat of Finance was the following: to weaken the
Soviet ruble to weaken the financial power of the U.S.S.R.,
to dislocate 'the economy and thus rouse among the population
discontent with the financial policy of the Soviet power,
discontent over taxes, discontent with the bad savings banks
service, delays in paying wages, etc., which were to result
in wide, organized discontent with the Soviet power and
were to help the conspirators to recruit adherents and to develop insurrectionary activities."
(Vol. IX, p. 79.)
The accused ZELENSKY and the group of wreckers he organized
in the Centrosoyuz and the co-operative societies caused confusion
in the planning of such goods as sugar, butter, eggs, makhorka,
etc., deliberately held up the shipment of goods to the rural districts, utterly confused accounts, which facilitated the robbery
and squandering of state funds with impunity, and encouraged the
cheating and robbery of consumers.
Speaking of the wrecking system of accounting of goods and
money he introduced in the Centrosoyuz, the accused ZELENSKY
testified as follows:
"Under these circumstances the thief remained unpunished, while, owing to the complicated system of accounting,
the honest worker got muddled up and was immediately
accused of embezzlement."
(Vol. X, p. 56.)
Treasonable wrecking activities on a considerable scale were
also carried on by the now exposed agent of foreign intelligence
services, the accused ROSENGOLTZ.
Concerni11g his treasonable activities in this sphere, the accused
ROSENGOLTZ testified as follows:
"In so far as TROTSKY had an agreement with Germany
and japan, of which I had been informed (both during the
negotiations-at my meeting with Sedov in I 933; and of
the agreement that had been reached-at my meeting with
him in I934), I received corresponding instructions from TROTSKY, and my wrecking activities in the sphere of foreign
trade served the same purpose."
(Vol. VI, p. 48.)
Simultaneously with the organization of active diversionist
and wrecking activities, the conspirators, on the orders of the
fasc.ist intel!igencc se~ices, set th~mselves the task of rousing
an msurrect1onary bandit movement in our country with the object
18

of organizing an armed rising of their insurrectionary anti-Soviet
gangs in the rear of the Red Army on the outbreak of intervention against the U.S.S.R.
·
The accused RYKOV testified as follows:
"We took the course of the violent overthrow of the
leadership of the Party and the Soviet power, and we decided to secure this overthrow by organizing kulak risings."
(Vol. I, p. 150 reverse.)
The investigation has established that the kulak insurrectionary armed risings that were being organized to take place in
the rear of the Red Army were part and parcel of the plans and
calculations of the fascist states which were preparing to attack
the U.S.S.R.; and that the Right and Trotskyite conspirators were
preparing to rise at the signal of the General Staffs of the fascist
countries.
Pursuing the instructions of the fascist intelligence services,
the participants in the conspiracy collected insurrectionary bandit cadres, preparing them for an active armed rising in the Far
East, the North Caucasus and other places in the Soviet Union~
particularly in Uzbekistan.
On this matter the accused KHODJAYEVtestifiedasfollows:
"The main object of the practical work of our organizations was to prepare active anti-Soviet cadres and to train
them in the spirit of struggle against the U.S.S.R. We accustomed the members of the organization to the idea that the
fight against the Soviet power would assume acute forms
and would lead to armed conflicts. That is why we devoted
attention to the preparation of the fighting forces of our
organization."
(Vol. XIII, p. 66.)
The organizers of insurrectionary bandit cadres relied only on
the remnants of the old counter-revolutionary elements, expecting to reinforce their insurrectionary reserves with the remnants
of the Basmachis and White Guards, who were to be smuggled .
into the Soviet Union from abroad, and with criminal bandits,
inmates of prison camps, etc.
Speaking of the insurrectionary bandit activities of the bourgeois nationalist organization headed by him in Uzbekistan, the
accused IKRAMOV testified:
"We preserved the necessary cadres, which in future were
to be utilized for an armed struggle against the Soviet power. These cadres consisted chiefly of remnants of the
kulaks, priests and former Basmachis. We instructed the
members of our organization holding leading district post~

2*

19

to preserve these cadres. Furthermore, We assumed _that in
case of armed action the remnants of the Basmach1 bands
which at one time had had to retreat across the frontier would
return to Soviet territory."
(Vol. XII, p. 56.)
The materials of the investigation and the personal testimony
of the accused BUKHARIN, ZUBAREV, ZELENSKY and
others establish the fact that they had engaged in the active
training of insurrectionary cadres, attempting to cover as many
districts of the Soviet Union as possible, and that, with the purpose
of enlarging the insurrectionary base to the maximum, the leaders
of the conspiracy had established contact with an illegal SocialistRevolutionary organization.
Thus, the accused BUKHARIN testified:
"The establishment of connections with the SocialistRevolutionaries dates back to the period when the organization of the Rights placed its stakes on kulak risings. In view
of the fact that the Rights had embarked on the organization
of such risings, the necessity arose of establishing connection$
with the Socialist-Revolutionaries, who had their roots in
the kulak strata in the countryside.
" ... I personally established connections through SEMYONOV with the underground Central Committee of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries within the Soviet Union, and through
CHLENOV with the foreign Central Committee of the So(Vol. V, pp. 90-91.)
cialist-Revolutionaries in Paris."
Such is the chain of shameful villainies perpetrated by the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, " which for many years carried
on its treasonable activities in the interests of foreign states
hostile to the U.S.S. R.
II. MURDER OF SOVIET PUBLIC MEN-S. M. KIROV,
V. R. MENZHINSKY, V. V. KUIBYSHEV AND A. M. GORKYPLOT AGAINST V. I. LENIN IN 1918
Entertaining no hope of the overthrow of the Soviet system by
means of espionage, wrecking, diversion, and kulak risings, the
Right and Trotskyite conspirators, possessed with rage and hatred for
the U.S.S.R., proceeded to make preparations for and to commit
terrorist acts against leaders of the government and the C.P.S.U.
The _investigation has established the fact that by direct agreement wit~ the Japanese and German intelligence services, and
upon the ~nstructions of enemy of the people L. TROTSKY, the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' engineered and committed a number of terrorist acts against some of the finest people of our country.

20

The accused RYKOV explained the motives for the adoption
of terrorist methods by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" as
follows:
"In view of the illegal and conspiratorial character of
the counter-revolutionary organization of the Rights, ·the
absence of any kind of mass basis for its counter-revolutionary activities, and the absence of all hope of arriving at power
in any other way, the adoption of t.errorist methods and a
'pa lace coup cl 'etat,' in the opinion of the Centre, held out some
prospects."
(Vol. I, p. 50.)
The accused BUKHARIN, who _in the course of the investigation admitted that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" had
already adopted terrorist methods in 1932, testified as follows:
"In 1932, too, during a meeting and conversation I had
with PYATAKOV, I learnt from him of his meeting with
L. SEDOV and his receipt through SEDOV of direct instructions from TROTSKY to adopt terrorist methods against
leaders of the Party and the Soviet government. I must also
confess that it was then that we virtually consented to an
agreement with terrorists, and my conversation with PYATAKOV was an agreement to co-ordinate with TROTSKY our.
actions directed towards the forcible overthrow of the leadership of the Party and the Soviet government.''
(Vol. V, p. 105 reverse.)
The terrorist activities of the conspirators were closely connected with the whole of their defeatist work, which is borne out,
for example, by the following testimony of the accused IVANOV:
"Speaking of terrorism, BUKHARIN said that the
'liquidation,' as he expressed it, of the leaders of the Party and
the Soviet government. .. would be very important for our
accession to power and would facilitate the defeat of the
U.S.S.R. in war."
, (Vol. VII, p. 81.)
In pursuance of the decisions taken in this connection, the
conspiratorial bloc widely developed the organization of terrorist
groups and the practical preparations for the.perpetration o.f terror~
ist acts against leaders of the C.P.S. U. and the Soviet government.
This is what the accused RYKOV testified in this connection:
"By that time we had already adopted the path of terrorism as one of the methods of combating the Soviet government .... This position of ours took the form of quite definite
activity on our part, and in particular on my part, in preparing terrorist acts against members of the Political Bureau 1

21

leaders of the Party and the government, and, first and foremost against STALIN, MOLOTOV, KAGANOVICH and
VOROSHILOV. In 1934 I had already given instructions to
have the automobiles of leaders of the Party and the· govern.ment watched by the ARTEMENKO terrorist group I had
formed."
(Vol. I, pp. 150 reverse, 151.)
Speaking of the proposal of the Socialist-Revolutionary SEMYONOV to organize a terrorist group, the accused BUKHARIN
testified:
"I want to tell the truth and declare that this proposal
was reported by me to a meeting of the centre, and we decided to charge SEMYONOV with the organization of terrorist
groups."
(Vol. V, p. 106 reverse.)
The investigation has established that the vile assassination
of S. M. KIROV committed by the Leningrad TrotskyiteZinovievite terrorist centre on December 1, 1934, was also committed
in pursuance of a decision of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,''
members of which are being charged in the present case.
The investigation has established that one of the participants
in this vile murder was the accused YAGO DA, who testified as
follows:
"That preparations for the assassination of S. M. KIROV
were being made in accordance with a decision of the conspiratorial centre, I had previously learnt from YENUKIDZE.
YENUKIDZE told me not to hinder the organization of
this terrorist act, and I agreed. With this purpose I summoned
ZAPOROZHETZ from Leningrad and instructed him not
to hinder the terrorist act that was being prepared against
S. M. KIROV."
(Vol. II, p. 209.)
This was confirmed by ZAPOROZHETZ and YENUKIDZE
during the investigation.
The villainous terrorist activities of the Right and Trotskyite
traitors and conspirators were not confined to the assassination o·f
S. M. KIROV.
As the investigation of the present case has established, A. M.
GORKY, V. R. MENZHINSKY and V. V. KUIBYSHEV fell
victims to terrorist acts committed on the instructions of the
joint Centre of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
As to the reasons which induced the Right and Trotskyite conspirators to commit the unparalleled and monstrous murder of
A. M. GORKY, the accused YAGO DA testified:
~'For a long time the joint Centre of the Right and Trotsky1te orga.niiation had endeavoured to influence GORKY and

22

make him sever his close connections with STAL IN. For this
purpose KAMENEV, TOMSKY and a number of others were
attached to GORKY. But no real results were achieved. GORKY
remained faithful to STALIN and was an ardent supporter
and advocate of his line. As the overthrow of the STALIN
leadership and the seizure of power by the Rights and Trotskyites was being considered seriously, the centre could not ignore
the exceptional influence of GORKY within thecountryand his
prestige abroad. If GORKY remained alive he would raise
his voice in protest against us. That we could not allow.
Having become convinced that GORKY could not be severed
from STALIN, the joint Centre, therefore, had to decide
to do away with GORKY."
(Vol. II, p. 200.)
The testimony of the accused YAGODA was fully corroborated by the accused RYKOV, who, when interrogated by the Procurator of the U.S.S.R. on January 10, 1938, testified:
"I know that TROTSKY, through his representatives in
the contact centre, did his utmost to fan animosity against
GORKY. This is naturally to be explained by the fact that
TROTSKY was well aware that GORKY considered him a
scoundrel and adventurer. On the other hand, the close friendship of GORKY for STALIN was generally known, and
the fact that he was an inflexible political supporter of STALIN
aroused the animosity of our organization against him."
(Vol. I, p. 166 reverse.)
To this the accused RYKOV added:
"In 1935 I had a conversation with YENUKIDZE, who
bluntly told me that the Trotskyite-Zinovievite part of the
bloc insisted on eliminating the political activities of
GORKY and would stop at nothing to attain this end. This
conversation made it clear to me that the question of doing
away with GORKY by terrorist methods might also arise."
(Vol. I, pp. 166 reverse, 167.)
This was also corroborated by the accused BUKHARIN, who
testified that in the beginning of 1935 TOMSKY had told him
that:
" ... The Trotskyite part of the Joint Centre of the bloc
had proposed to organize a hostile act against A. M. GORKY
because he was a supporter of STALIN'S policy."
(Vol. V, p. 119 reverse.)
In this connection the accused BUKHARIN explained that
he does not preclude the possibility that it was the physical
removal of GORKY that was then contemplated. That preparations

23

for the physical removal of M. GORKY were conteinplatecl
is shown by the testimony of the accused BESSONOV, who was
personally given a "line,, to this effect directly by L. TROTSKY
when he met the latter at the end of July I934.
The accused BESSONOV testified that at this meeting
L. TROTSKY, having declared that
" ' ... it would be unpardonable squeamishness if we did
not at once proceed to the systematic physical removal of
STALIN and of all his immediate colleagues,' said:
"'M. GORKY is very intimate with STALIN. He plays
an exceptional role in winning sympathy for the U.S.S.R.
among the democratic opinion of the world and especially
of Western Europe. GORKY is very popular as a close friend
of STALIN'S and as a vehicle of the general line of the Party.
Our former supporters among the intelligentsia are lea vi ng us very largely under the influence of GORKY. From this
I draw the conclusion that GORKY must be put out of the
way. Convey this instruction to PYATAKOV in the most
categorical form: GORKY must be physically exterminated
(Vol. XI, pp. 74-75.)
at all costs.'"
It was in accordance with this instruction of enemy of tlle people L. TROTSKY that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"
adopted its monstrous decision to murder A. M. GORKY.
"The execution of this decision was entrusted to me,"
the accused YAGODA testified.
The accused YAGODA enlisted the accused in this case
Dr. L. G. LEVIN, formerfamily doctor of A. M. GORKY, Professor
D. D. PLETNEV, P. P. KRYUCHKOV, A. M. GORKY'S secretary, and P. P. BULANOV, YAGODA'S own secretary, as the
immediate perpetrators of this villainous plan.
The accused BULANOV, one of the organizers of this crime,
testified:
"Professor PLETNEV, Dr. LEVIN and GORKY'S secretary, KRYUCHKOV, took a direct part in the killing of
A. M. GORKY. I, for instance, personally witnessed how YAGODA frequently summoned KRYUCHKOV and advised
him to cause GORKY to catch a chill, to make him fall ill
in one way or another. YAGODA stressed the point that the
condition of GORKY'S lungs was such that any illness caused
by a cold would increase the chances of his death. The rest
would be done by PLETNEV and LEVIN, who had suitable
(Vol. XVI, p. 72.J
instructions on this score."
The accused PLETNEV, who took a direct part in the murder
of A. M. GORKY and V. V. KUIBYSHEV, testified;

24

"YAGODA told me that I must help him to secure the
physical removal of certain political leaders of the country.
He bluntly proposed that I should take advantage of my position as physician to V. V. KUIBYSHEV and A. M. GORKY
io hasten their death by wrong methods of treatment. I attempted to refuse, but in the end was forced to consent. After this,
YAGO DA informed me that my accomplice would be
Dr. LEVIN, and, in the case of A. M. GORKY, the latter's
secretary, P. P. KRYUCHKOV, as well.
"Having accepted this gruesome commission from YAGO DA,
I. in conjunction with Dr. LEVIN, drew up a plan for the
killing of A. M. GORKY and V. V. KUIBYSHEV.
"I must confess that my anti-Soviet sentiments played
a part in my consent to this crime. Until my arrest I concealed
these anti-Soviet sentiments in every way, playing a game
of duplicity and claiming to he a Soviet supporter.,,
(Vol. XVIII, pp. 72-73.)
This was corroborated by the accused LEVIN, who testified:
"I confess that by deliberately adopting a wrong method
of treatment and prescribing medicines unsuited to the given
illness, I, together with my accomplices, and in agreement
with YAGODA, was responsible for the untimely death of
MAXIM GORKY and KUIBYSHEV.,, (Vol. XVII, p. 10.)
During the course of the investigation, the accused LEVIN
and PLETNEV gave detailed testimony as to the way they actually arranged the killing of A. M. GORKY and V. V. KUIBYSHEV.
The investigation has established that the accused MAX IMOV,
V. V. KUIBYSHEV'S secretary, took an active part in bringing
about the death of .V. V. KUIBYSHEV. MAXIMOV testified
as follows:
"I consented to this crime as a member of the counterTcvolutionary organization of the Rights, which I had joined
in 1928.
"YAGODA also knew that I belonged to the counterrevolutionary organization and was present during one of my
conversations with YENUKIDZE, when we drew up the
plan for doing away with KUIBYSHEV."
(Vol. XX, p. 45 reverse.)
V. R. MENZHINSKY, Chairman of the O.G.P.U., was also
murdered by the accused Dr. LEVIN and Dr. KAZAKOV on the
direct instructions of YAGODA.
Interrogated by the Procurator of the U.S.S.R. on February 4i
1938, the accused KAZAKOV testified:

25

"YAGODA told me that MENZHINSKY liked and trusted me and that therefore Dr. LEVIN and I could succeed in
doing away with MENZHINSKY. YAGOJ?A gave me the
following instructions: I was to work out with Dr. LEVIN a
method of treatment for V. R. MENZHINSKY that would
hasten his death and end his life as soon as possible.
"
(Vol. XIX, p. 51 reverse.)
Continuing to relate his conversation with the accused YAGODA
in which the latter spoke of the necessity of hastening the death of
V. R. MENZHINSKY, the accused KAZAKOV testified:
"After this conversation with YAGODA, LEVIN and I drew
up a method of treatment for V. R. MENZHINSKY which in
reality totally undermined his strength and determined the
rapid onset of death. Thus LEVIN and I actually murdered
V. R. MENZHINSKY in this way.
"I gave Dr. LEVIN a mixture of lysates I had composed,
which, in conjunction with alkaloids, led to the desired result, namely, the virtual murder of MENZHINSKY."
(Vol. XIX, p. 51 reverse.)
This was fully corroborated by the accused L. G. LEVIN and
P. P. BULANOV.
The accused L. G. LEVIN confirmed that, having received instructions from the accused YAGODA to hasten the death of V. R.
MENZHINSKY, he, LEVIN, decided to enlist Dr. KAZAKOV
in this crime.
The accused LEVIN testified:
"I said that this could be done best of all by KAZAKOV,
as he used medicines which he himself prepared without control in his own laboratory, and what he injected he alone
knew.
"After preliminary and preparatory talks with KAZAKOV,
I conveyed to him the instructions I had received from YAGODA. He hesitated very much at first, fearing that the crime
might be discovered, but in the end he consented. I did not ask
what he used, all the more since he usually kept his medicines
secret, but I knew that he had wide opportunities in this respect.
"V. R. MENZHINSKY'S death occurred suddenly during
sleep from paralysis of the heart, on the eve of the death of
M~XIM PESHKOV (A. M. GORKY'S son), if I am not
m1stak~n. I had no doubt that this was KAZAKOV'S work."
(Vol. XVII, pp. 54·55.)

26

On the subject of the murder of V. R. MENZHINSKY, the
accused BULANOV testified:
"XAGODA had long ago conceived the idea of physically
removing. MENZHINSKY. He several times in my presence
expressed dissatisfaction that MENZHINSKY continued to
live and to occupy the post of head of the O.G.P.U. Then he said
outright that MENZHINSKY must be put out of the way.
It was difficult to arrange the job through Dr. LEVIN, because MENZHINSKY did not like LEVIN and refused to be
treated by him. I then suggested to YAGODA to 'fix up' some
other doctor for MENZHINSKY. This was done. With the
assistance of Dr. LEVIN, MENZHINSKY was 'fixed up, with
Dr. KAZAKOV, who did the job, or, to put it plainly, hastened
MENZHINSKY'S death by deliberately employing a wrong
method of treatment."
(Vol. XVI, p. 75.)
Apart from the murder of A. M. GORKY and V. V. KUIBYSHEV, the accused LEVIN and KRYUCHKOV, on direct instructions of the accused YAGODA, in 1934killedM.A.PESHKOV, the
son of A. M. GORKY, in a similar way.
In this connection, the accused LEVIN testified:
"I confess my guilt in the murder of Maxim and want to
say here that I did it on the direct demand of YAGO DA. I did
not have the courage to refuse, and I became a murderer."
(Vol. XVII, p. 138 reverse.)
The accused KRYUCHKOV, who took an active part in the
crimes organized by YAGODA, testified:
"In these crimes I was guided by the directions of certain
members of the anti-Soviet organization of the Rights, in
particular by the directions of YAGO DA. It was from YAGO DA that I received instructions forcibly to do away with
Maxim PESHKOV, and then Alexei Maximovich GORKY.
"In addition to myself, YAGODA enlisted for the commission of these crimes the physicians LEVIN and VINOGRADOV and Professor PLETNEV."
(Vol. XXI, p. 16.)
The accused YAGO DA, confirming that M. A. PESHKOV was
murdered on his instructions,. testified:
"In May 1934, with the help of KRYUCHKOV, Max (M. A.
PESHKOV) contracted double pneumonia, and the physicians
LEVIN, VINOGRADOV and PLETNEV treated him in such
a way as to bring about his death."
(Vol. II, p. 193.)
After being removed from his post as People's Commissar of
Internal Affairs of the U.S.S.R., the accused YAGODA also took

27

measures to murder Comrade N. I. YEZHOV, People's Commissar
of Internal Affairs of the U.S.S.R.
In his testimony, the accused YAGODA explained the motives
which induced him to hasten a terrorist act against N. I. YEZHOV
as follows:
"My removal from my post i'.I the People's _Commi~sarial
of Internal Affairs and the appointment of YEZHOV rn my
place meant the complete collapse of our conspiracy, because
it would be impossible to prevent the routing of. the'. cadres
of the anti-Soviet organization. YEZHOV would dig up everything. YEZHOV had to be put out of the way. This was tl:e
only decision I could come to, and I began to make energetic
preparationstoputitinto effect .... " (Vol. II, pp. 141-42.)
YAGODA attempted to carry out his plan through his accomplices, a prominent part being played by the accused BULANOV.
The accused YAGO DA and the accused BULANOV confessed
that it was proposed to accomplish the murder of Comrade N. I.
YEZHOV by means of a poison specially prepared for the purpose:
"When YAGODA was removed from the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs," the accused BULANOV testified,
"he gave me and his personal agent, SAVOLAINEN, direct
(Vol. XVI, p. 27.)
instructions to poison YEZHOV."
Describing in detail the methods by which the accused YAGODA tried to murder Comrade N. I. YEZHOV, the accused BULANOV testified that he (BULANOV) himself prepared the mixture of drugs intended for the poisoning of Comrade YEZHOV.
Interrogated in the Office of the Procurator of the U.S.S. R. 1
the accused YAGODA fully admitted having committed this
crime, testifying:
"Yes, I must admit that I made preparations for the perpetration of this crime. I made preparations for the murder
of YEZHOV as a man who was dangerous to the counter-revolutionary plot and who might expose our counter-revolutionary
organization."
(Vol. II, p. 209.)
Thus the investigating authoritiesconsideritestablished beyond
a 11 doubt that the leading members of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites," against whom criminal proceedings are being
brought in this case, committed terrorist acts against S. M. KIROV,
V. R. MENZHINSKY, V. V. KUIBYSHEV, A. M. GORKY and
M. A. PESHKOV and made preparations for a number of other
terrorist acts which they had no time to carry out.
The murder of Soviet public men completed the circle of heinous
state crimes by which this band of contemptible apostates of

28

our counfry, provocateurs of the tsarist secret police and hirelings
of foreign intelligence services, who were selling our land and
liberty to foreign capitalists, strove to carry out a fascist plan for
the overthrow of the Soviet system and the restoration of capitalism
in our country.

As has now been brought to light, neither in the case of the
Trotskyites nor in the case of the Rights were these monstrous
crimes fortuitous.
The investigation has established that as far back as 1918, directly after the October Revolution, at the time of the conclusion of
the Peace of Brest-Litovsk, BUKHARIN and his group of socalled "Left Communists," and TROTSKY and his group, together with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, hatched a plot
against V. I. LENIN, the head of the Soviet government.
As the materials of the investigation show, BUKHARIN and
other conspirators aimed at fFustrating the Brest-Litovsk Peace,
overthrowing the Soviet government, arresting and murdering
V. I. LENIN, J. V. STALIN and J. M. SVERDLOV, and forming
a new government consisting of Bukharinites-who as a blind
at that time called themselves "Left Communists"-of Trotskyites
and of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
Questioned in the Office of the Procurator of the U.S.S.R. on
February 19 and 20, 1938, V. A. KARELIN, former member of
the Central Committee of the Party of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, gave the following testimony regarding the conspiratorial
activities of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Bukharinites in 1918:
"Final agreement with the 'Left Communists' in the struggle against the Soviet government headed by LENIN, STALIN
and SVERDLOV was reached by us after the Seventh
Congress of the Communist Party.
"On the instructions of the Central Committee of the 'Left'
Socialist-Revolutionaries, the negotiations with the 'Left
Communists .. were conducted by KAMKOV, PROSHYAN,
and myself."
(Vol. XLIV, p. 86.)
Speaking of the character of these negotiations and the part
played by the accused N. I. BUKHARIN, V. A. KARELIN further
testified as follows:
"BUKHARIN proposed that we should not stop at the
arrest of the government but bring about the physical extermination of the leaders of the Soviet power, and in the first
(Vol. XLIV, p. 38.)
place of LENIN and STALIN."
29

This was corroborated by other persons who were examined as
witnesses in the present case.
B. D. KAMKOV, one of the former leaders of the Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary Party, testified:
"I personally had a conversation with BUKHARIN in
which he said roughly the following: 'The struggle within our
Party against LENIN'S position on the Brest-Lit.ovs~ Pe~ce
is assuming acute forms. Within our ranks the quest10n rs berng
discussed of creating a new government consisting of "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries and "Left Communists."' BUKHARIN mentioned PYATAKOV as a possible candidate for leader
of the new government, and stated that the idea was to bring
about the change of government by arresting its members>
headed by LEN IN.
"Further negotiations with BUKHARIN were conducted
by KARELIN and PROSHYAN. By the end of March a final
agreement was reached between the 'Left Communists' and
the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries on the following points:
I) that in the struggle against the Bolsheviks and the Soviet
government the 'Left Communists' were to render organizational and political assistance to the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries; 2) that by joint action of the 'Left' Socia1ist-Revolutionaries and 'Left Communists,' LENIN'S government was to
be overthrown and a new government formed, consisting of
'Left Communists' and 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries.
"After this, the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries organized
the assassination of MIRBACH and the July revolt. The 'Left
Communists' were fully aware of the preparations being made
for the assassination of MIRBACH and for the July revolt."
(Vol. XLIV, p. 92 reverse.)
Questioned in the capacity of witnesses in the Office of the
Procurator of the U.S.S.R. on February 19, 1938, V. N. YAKOVLEVA, V. V. OSSINSKY and V. N. MANTSEV, former leaders and
active members of the group of "Left Communists," fully corroborated that in 1918 a plot was hatched, on the initiative of the
accused BUKHARIN. by the bloc of ''Left Communists" and
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries against V. I. LENIN as head of
the Soviet government:
Thus, V. N. YAKOVLEVA testified:
"BUKHARIN expressed to me the idea that the political struggle was assuming ever more acute forms and that
matters could not be confined to the mere political formulation
of lack of confidence in the Central Committee of the Party.
BUKHARIN declared that a change of leadership was in30

cvitable, and that in this connection the question was beincr
discussed of arresting LENIN, STALIN and SVERDLOV, and
even of their physical extermination .... "
(Vol. XLIV, p. 77.)
In this connection V. V. OSS INSKY testified as follows:
"It was with N. I. BUKHARIN that I principally talked
about our measures for the overthrow of LENIN'S government. ... Approximately in May (or at the end of April) 1918
I had a talk with BUKHARIN when I asked him to what extent the information I had about his designs to arrest the
LENIN government was correct.
"BUKHARIN did not deny that he had such designs."
(Vol. XLIV, p. 54.)
Speaking further about these "measures," V. V. OSSINSKY
testified:
"I learned about the bloc of the 'Left Communists' with the
'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries from YAKOVLEVA and then
from BUKHARIN. I also learned from them that in March or
April 1918 BUKHARIN proposed at the bureau (of the Moscow region) that LENIN, STALIN and SVERDLOV should
be arrested. BUKHARIN further stressed the point that he
was of the opinion that after the arrest of the government,
LENIN, STALIN and SVERDLOV should be physically exterminated."
(Vol. XLIV, p. 88 reverse.)
Similar testimony was given by V. N. MANTSEV when questioned in the Office of the Procurator of the U.S.S.R. on February 20, 1938:
"l confirm that a bloc was formed between the 'Left Communists' and 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries.
"I confirm that roughly in March or April, at a close
meeting of the bureau, BUKHARIN made a report in which
he uttered a number of slanderous statements against the Soviet government and proposed to organize the overthrow of
the Soviet power and the arrest of LENIN, STALIN and
SVERDLOV, with the purpose of physically exterminating
them."
(Vol. XLIV, p. 82.)
Speaking of the role of L. TROTSKY in the plot against
V. I. LENIN in 1918, the accused BUKHARIN t_estified:
"At that time the idea again arose of a coup and the arrest
of LENIN, STALIN and SVERDLOV as the dominant figures
in the Party and Soviet leadership. This time it arose on
the initiative of TROTSKY, to whom the proposal of the
31

'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries apparently became knoWtl-··
through PYATAKOV, I presume."
(Vol. V, p. 124.)
Interrogated during the preliminary investigation, V. N. YAKOVLEVA testified:
"TROTSKY considered that the political struggle had
only just begun, that it might assu1!1~ the most aggress.ivc
forms, that against LEN IN'S position on the question
of peace the 'Left Communists' would have the support of the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries and other parties,
that preparations must be made for a change of government
and the arrest of its leaders, headed by LENIN and STALIN.
TROTSKY considered that in so acute a period of the revolution, if the struggle were to develop, matters might not be confined only to the arrest of the leaders, and that the arrests
would logically and inevitably lead to the question of their
physic:tl removal."
(Vol. XLIV, p. 78.)
Interrogated in the preliminary investigation, V. N. MANTSEV,
one of the leaders of the group of "Left Communists," testified:
"Several days after my conversation with Y AKOVLEVA,
TROTSKY asked me to come and see him. I had a long talk
with him at his home, during which TROTSKY developed at
length the idea that LENIN and STALIN must be assassinated."
(Vol. XLIV, p. 84.)
The investigating authorities now possess irrefutable evidence
proving that the villainous attempt on the life of V. I. LEN IN committed on August 30, 1918, by the Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist F. KAPLAN was a direct result of the realization of the criminal plans of the "Left Communists,,, headed by N. I. BUKHARIN, and of their accomplices, the "Left" and Right SocialistRevolutionaries, and was initiated by the accused BUKHARIN.
Questioned in the Office of the Procurator of the U.S.S.R. on
February 19, 1938, V. A. KARELIN testified:
"I must also confess to the gravest crime, namely, the
participation of the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
'Left Communists' in the organization of the attempt on the
life of LENIN. This fact has been concealed from the Soviet
people for twenty years. The fact was concealed that we, in
conjunction with the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, on the
insistence Gf BUKHARIN, attempted to murder LENIN. The
trial of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries did not disclose
the real circumstances of this crime and did not reveal the
part played in it by the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries and
the 'Left Communists.'
32

"After the July revolt, the Central Committee of the 'Left'
Socialist-Revolutionaries decided to adopt terrorist methods in
the struggle against the Soviet government.
"It should be mentioned that even after the revolt PROSHY_AN had meetings with BUKHARIN, who bluntly put before
him the question of the physical extermination of LENIN. More
precisely, the question of committing a terrorist act against
LENIN was raised by BUKHARIN in the second half of July
1918. PROSHY AN reported this to us members of the Central
Committee of the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries.
"Such a demand by the 'Left Communists' played a great
part in hastening the terrorist act against LENIN committed
by the Central Committee of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries."
(Vol. XLIV, pp. 86-87.)
This was also corroborated by V. V. OSSINSKY, who, when
interrogated on February 19, 1938, testified as follows:
"At the end of 1918 STUKOV, who together with BUKHARIN was connected with the Socialist-Revolutionaries, told
me that the shot fired at LENIN by the Right Socialist-Revolutionary KAPLAN was the result not only of the instructions of the leadership of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries,
but also of measures that had been outlined by the bloc of
'Left Communists' with the Socialist-Revolutionaries aiming
at the physical extermination of LENIN, STALIN _and
SVERDLOV."
(Vol. XLIV, p. 89.)
At confrontations in the Office of the Procurator of the U.S.S.R.
of the accused BUKHARIN with the witnesses V. V. OSSINSKY,
V. N. YAKOVLEVA, V. N. MANTSEV, V. A. KARELIN and
B. D. KAMKOV, these witnesses fully confirmed their testimony
as set forth above.
Under the weight of the evidence, the accused BUKHARIN
admitted a number of criminal facts and testified:
"I must admit that we had direct contact with the 'Left'
Socialist-Revolutionaries, whose platform was the forcible
overthrow of the Soviet government, headed by LENIN,
STALIN and SVERDLOV, to be· followed by the arrest of
LENIN, STALIN and SVERDLOV and the setting up of a new
government consisting of 'Left Communists' and 'Left' Social(Vol. V, p. 122 reverse.)
ist-Revolutionaries .... "
The facts now established regarding the crimes committed by
the accused BUKHARIN and enemy of the people· TROTSKY in
1918 against the Soviet state and its leaders, V. I. LENIN, J. V.
STALIN and J.M. SVERDLOV, throw a vivid light on the whole
subsequent criminal counter-revolutionary activity of the gang of
3

33

·BUKHARIN and TROTSKY, which is now charged with the
gravest state crimes committed on ~he direct instructions of fa~cist
intelligence services during the penod 1921-1937.
DEFINITION OF THE CHARGE
The investigating authorities consider it established:
1) that in 1932-33, on the instructions of intelligence services of
foreign states hostile to the U.S.S.R., a conspiratorial group named
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was formed by the accused in the
present case with the object of espionage on behalfof foreign states,
wrecking, diversionist and terrorist activities, undermining the
military power of the U.S.S.R., provoking a military attack by
these states on the U.S.S.R., working for the defeat of the U.S.S.R.,
dismembering the U.S.S. R. and severing from it the Ukraine, Byelorussia, the Central Asiatic Republics, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and the Maritime Region of the Far East for the benefit
of the aforementioned foreign states, and, lastly, with the object
of overthrowing the Socialist social and state system existing in
the U.S.S.R. and of restoring capitalism and the power of the
bourgeoisie in the U.S.S.R.;
2) that the ' 1bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' entered into relations
with certain foreign states with the purpose of receiving armed assistance from them for the accomplishment of its criminal designs;
3) that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" systematically engaged in espionage on behalf of these states, supplying foreign intelligence services with highly important state secret information;
4) that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' systematically performed wrecking and diversionist acts in various branches of Socialist construction (industry, agriculture, railways, in the sphere of
finance, municipal development, etc.);
5) that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" organized a number of
terrorist acts against leaders of the C.P.S. U. and the Soviet government and perpetrated terrorist acts against S. M. KIROV,
V. R~ MENZHINSKY, V. V. KUIBYSHEV and A. M. GORKY.
All the accused stand convicted both by the testimony of witnesses and by the documents and material evidence in the files
an~ have fully admitted that they are guilty of the charges preferred
agamst them.
On the aforementioned grounds the following persons:
1) BUKHARIN, Nikolai Ivanovich, born 1888;
2) RYKOV, Alexei Ivanovich, born 1881;
3) YAGODA, Genrikh Grigorievich, born 1891;
4) KRESTINSKY, Nikolai Nikolayevich, born 1883;
5) RAKOVSKY, Khristian Georgievich, born 1873;
6) ROSENGOLTZ, Arkady Pavlovich, born 1889;
34

7) IVANOV, Vladimir Ivanovich, borri '1893;
8) CHERNOV, Mikhail Alexandrovich, born 1891;
9} GRINKO, Grigori Fedorovich, born 1890;
IO) ZELENSKY, Isaac Abramovich, born 1890;
I 1) BESSO NOV, Sergei Alexeyevich, born 1892;
12) IKRAMOV, Akmal, born 1898;
13) KHODJA YEV, Faizulla, born 1896;
14) SHARANOOVICH, Vasily Fomich, born 1897;
15) ZUBAREV, Prokopy Timofeyevich, born 1886;
16) BULANOV, Pavel Petrovich, born 1895;
17) LEVIN, Lev Origorievich, born 1870;
18) PLETNEV, Dmitry Dmitrievich, born 1872;
19) KAZAKOV, Ignaty Nik-0Iayevich, born 1891;
20) MAXIMOV-DIKOVSKY, Venyamin Adamovich (Abram~
ovich), born 1900;
21) KRYUCHKOV, Pyotr .Petrovich, born 1889
-are accused of having, as active participants in an anti-Soviet
conspiracy, committed the gravest state crimes enumerated in paragraphs 1-5 of the Definition of the Charge, i.e., crimes covered
by Articles 581 a, 582 , 587, 588 , 589, and 5811 of the Criminal Code
of the R.S.F.S.R., and the accused IVANOV, ZELENSKY and
ZUBAREV, in addition, of crimes covered by Article 58 13 of the
Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
On the aforesaid grounds all the above-mentioned accused are
subject to trial by the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court
of the U.S.S.R.
The cases of V. V. OSSINSKY, V. N. YAKOVLEVA, V. N.
MANTSEV, V. A. KARELIN, B. D. KAMKOV, I. N. STUKOV,
E. V. ARTEMENKO, I. V. ZAPOROZHETZ, I. M. SAVOLAl7
NEN, G. I. SEMYONOV and S. B. CHLENOV have been made the
subject of separate proceedings.
Proceedings against Dr. A. I. VINOGRADOV have been terminated owing to his death.
The case of A. S. YENUKIDZE was tried by the Military Collegium of the Supreme· Court of the U.S.S.R. on December 15,
1937.
The present indictment was drawn up in Moscow' on Febru<;l.ry 23,
1938.
A. VYSHINSKY
Procurator of the U .S S. R.

*

*
35

*

THE PRESIDENT: Ac\c·used Bukharin, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I pl~ad guilty to the charges brought
against me.
,
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rykov, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
RYKOV: Yes, I do.
1
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Yagoda, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
YAGODA: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Krestinsky, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
KRESTINSKY: I plead not guilty. I am not a Trotskyite. I was
never a member of the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, of whose
existence I was not aware. Nor have I committed any of the crimes
with which I personally am charged, in particular I plead not guilty
to the charge of having had connections with the German intelligence SP.rvice.
·
THE PRESIDENT: Do you corroborate the confession you made
at the preliminary investigation?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, at the preliminary investigation I confessed, but I have never been a Trotskyite.
THE PRESIDENT: I repeat the question, do you plead guilty?
KRESTINSKY: Before my arrest I was a member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) and I remain one now.
THE PRESIDENT: Do you plead guilty to the charge of participating in espionage activities and of participating in terrorist
activities?
KRESTINSKY: I have never been a Trotskyite, I have never
belonged to the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites and have not committed a single crime.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rakovsky, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
RAKOVSKY: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rosengoltz, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Ivanov, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
IVANOV: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Chernov, do you plead guilty to
the cliarges brought against you?
CHERNOV: I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Grinko, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
GRINKO: Yes, I do.

36

THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zelensky, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
ZELENSKY: Yes, I plead guilty to the charge of belonging
to the organization of the Rights, I plead guilty to the charge of
having participated in wrecking activities, which I carried out
on the instructions of the Rights' centre, I plead guilty to having
put on the staff of the Centrosoyuz alien and rebel cadres, I plead
· guilty to the charge of having served in the tsarist secret police.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bessonov, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
BESSONOV: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Ikramov, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
IKRAMOV: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Khodjayev, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
KHODJAYEV: Yes, I do. .
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Sharangovich, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes, wholly and entirely guilty.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zubarev, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
ZUBAREV: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bulanov, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought agafost you?
BULANOV: Yes, I do.
THE PRES ID ENT: Accused Levin, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
LEVIN: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Pletnev, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
PLETNEV: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Kazakov, do you plead guilty to
the charges brought against you?
KAZAKOV: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Maxirnov, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
MAXIMOV: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Kryuchkov, do you plead guilty
to the charges brought against you?
KRYUCHKOV: Yes, I do.
THE PRES ID ENT: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*
37

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
·
·
:
·
- THE PRESIDENT: The session is. resumed:. Comrade Procurator, have. you any proposals to make concerning the procedure
of Jhe Court investigation?
·
VYSHINSKY: Yes, I have. I would ask that the following procedure: be adopted for the Court investigation: that we start with
the examination of the accused Bessonov. Then I would ask to examine .__:Qrinko, . Chernov,· Ivanov, Krestinsky, Zubarev, Rykov,
Sharangovich, Khodjayev, Zelensky, Ikramov, Rakovsky, Rosengoltz, and thei:i Bukharin, Levin, Bulanov,Yagoda,Pletnev, Kryuchkov~ Kazakov.; and~ lastly Maximov.
.,
THE PRESIDENT: Have Counsel for Defence any objection
to the _proposed procedure?
. COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE· BRAUDE: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Have· the accused any objection to the
procedure of the Court investigation as proposed by the Procurator?
. THE ACCUSED: (Reply in the negative.)
,
THE PRESIDENT: Before proceeding to examine the accused
I consider it necessary to warn the parties and the accused that the
omissions that were. made· in reading the indictment must be taken
into account during the course of the Court investigation.
Accused Bessonov, do you corroborate the testimony you made
during the preliminary investigation?
BESSONOV: Yes, I do.
·
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any questions. to put to the accused Bessonov?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, I have.
Accused Bessonov, tell the Court briefly, in a few words, your
·
biography.
BESSONOV: I was born in 1892 in the town of Kirzhach, Vladimir Gubernia. I studied at the Vladimir Divinity School and at the
Ecclesiastical Seminary, then I was sent abroad.
VYSHINSKY: Did you finish your studies at the Ecclesiastical
Seminary?
.
· BESSONOV: ·No, I did not. I was twice expelled.
VYSHINSKY: How is it that you went to study at an Ecclesiastical Seminary?
'- BESSONOV: My father was a verger, and this explains why
I went to the Divinity School and then to the Ecclesiastical Seminary.
.
VYSHINSKY: Who sent you abroad?
BESSONOV: The Moscow patron Shakhov, in 1912.
VYSHINSKY: In 1912?
BESSONOV: Then I returned to Russia to take my diploma.
38

I was deported to Vologda Gubernia because I belonged to a Socialist-Revolutionary organization.
VYSHINSKY: You joined the Socialist-Revolutionary Party in
1912?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And how long did you remain in that party?
BESSONOV: Until 1918.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, the October Revolution found you in
the ranks of the Socialist-Revolutionaries?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What was your attitude towards the October
Revolution?
BESSONOV: Socialist-Revolutionary.
VYSHINSKY: That is?
BESSONOV: Together with the other Socialist-Revolutionaries
I did not accept the October Revolution. In August 1918 I broke
with the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and in October 1918 I officially
announced this.
VYSHINSKY: But up to 1918?
BESSONOV: Up to 1918 I agreed wholly and entirely with the
line of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, except for the war
period, when I was a defeatist.
VYSHINSKY: At that period what was your attitude towards
the October Revolution, the Communist Party? Friendly or hostile?
BESSONOV: Hostile.
VYSHINSKY: How did your hostility express itself?
BESSONOV: On the instructions of the Vologda City and Regional Committees of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party I spoke at
meetings, explaining and defending the position of the SocialistRevolutionaries on the October Revolution and on current events.
The last public speech I made was o.n the Brest-Litovsk Peace.
VYSHINSKY: What did you say in that speech?
.'
BESSONOV: I was sharply opposed to the signing of the Brest
Peace.
VYSHINSKY: In 1919?
BESSONOV: In 1919 I stood wholly and entirely on the platform of supporting the Soviet government, I joined the Red Army
as a volunteer.
·
VYSHINSKY: When did you join the Communist Party?
BESSONOV: In 1920, in May.
VYSHINSKY: When did you take the path of Trotskyite
activities?
.
BESSONOV: I would ask permission to relate this in greater
detail.
VYSHINSKY: That is a matter for the Court.
THE PRESIDENT: Relate only the :i;nain. facts.
39

tlt.SSONOV: My Trotskyite activities began in 1931, in Berlin.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances?
BESSONOV: In 1931 I was working in the Berlin Trade Representation of the U.S.S.R. and was director of the Commercial Policy Department. In the course of the negotiations which the Soviet
government was conducting in 1931 with the German industrialists concerning the matter of credii.s, I was one of the most active
figures in the negotiations. This brought me into close contact with
Pyatakov, who drew me into the Trotskyite organization.
VYSHINSKY: What was the nature of your underground Trotskyite activities at that time?
BESSONOV: The main task that Pyatakov set before me at
that time, apart from my participating in the negotiations with the
German industrialists-negotiations which, of course, deserve to
be dealt with in somewhat greaterdetail later on-the main task
that Pyatakov set before me was to establish constant and regular
connections with Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: Why did Pyatakov make you the proposal to
organize these connections?
BESSONOV: As far as I understand, Pyatakov had had connections with Trotsky before that. But these connections were of
an irregular character and suffered from a number of defects. But
circumstances demanded of Pyatakov and of the whole Trotskyite organization the establishment of regular constant connections that would enable the receipt of Trotsky's instructions and
information about the activities of the Trotskyites in the U.S.S.R.
to be constant. This was the principal motive that led to the formation in Berlin of a permanent liaison point which functioned
right up to my departure from Berlin in February last year.
VYSHINSKY: But why did the choice fall upon you?
BESSONOV: I was one of the most, I would say, firmly established persons on the staff of the Berlin Trade Representation.
VYSHINSKY: What post did you occupy there?
BESSONOV: I occupied the post of member of t~1e Soviet
Trade Representation.
·
VYSHINSKY: Of the Berlin Trade Representation?
BESSONOV: Yes, of the Berlin Trade Representation, which
was then the most central trade representation, through which
trade negotiations were conducted with ten EtJropean countries.
This work required very long experience and, quite naturally, there
was a definite opinion that under these circumstances I probably
would remain and stay in Berlin longest.
. VYSHINSKY: Hence your official position was a very convenient one for carrying out the duties of liaison man?
BESSONOV: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: Did you agree to play this role?
40

BESSONOV: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
BESSONOV: I have already said that Pyatakov drew me into
the Trotskyite organization...•
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you agreed as a Trotskyite?
BESSONOV: Pyatakov drew me into the Trotskyite organization, consequently, I thereby undertook certain obligations towards that organization. When instructions were given me, in particular, to organize connections with Trotsky, I carried out those
instructions.
VYSHINSKY: At that time were you aware that the Troi.skyite
organization, under the leadership of Pyatakov, as Trotsky's representative in the U.S.S.R., and under Trotsky's own leadership,
was already carrying on definite plotting conspiratorial undermining work?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: How did you become aware of this, and under
what circumstances?
BESSONOV: Pyatakov, during one of his emphatic talks with
me about this subject, described to me the state of the opposition in the U.S.S.R. Besides, he described the situation in
the U.S.S.R. in entirely false and slanderous colours. The
picture he described was sufficiently expressive to influence me in
a definite way. Moreover, Pyatakov himself, as a personality,
could not but impress me. Of the people with whom life had brought
me in touch up to that time he seemed to be best informed about
European affairs, and he impressed me as a business leader.
I began to listen to Pyatakov with considerably greater attention than I had done under other circumstances. I, like many other
employees abroad, had become widely familiar with foreign-under
our Soviet conditions illegal-literature, in particular, with the
bulletin published by Trotsky. And finally, when Pyatakov came
to organize me-to enlist me-he presented to me a picture of the
state of the opposition forces in the U.S. S. R. First of all he mentioned the fact that the Trotskyites and Zinovievites had united on a
common platform. Then he went on to say that steps had been taken, contact had been established with the Rights, steps which
promised to be very successful. He spoke about the actual discontent
which existed among broad strata of the illegal united TrotskyiteZinovievite organizations, into which it was proposed also to draw
the Rights, with whom contact was actually established. Pyatakov
rather emphatically said that it was a matter of changing the leadership.
VYSHINSKY: You then learnt from what Pyatakov said that
a definite organization existed?
41

BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Under whose leadership was this organization
operating?
BESSO NOV: Pyatakov did not in the least conceal the fact that
the organization was entirely guided by Trotsky's instructions.
VYSHINSKY: What specifically did Pyatakov tell you about
the Rights, and whom did he mention?
BESSONOV: Pyatakov said that steps were being taken to
establish organizational contact with the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: Concretely, with whom?
BESSONOV: With Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky.
VYSHINSKY: And the latter-Bukharin, Rykov and Tomskydid they take any steps in this direction?
BESSONOV: Up to 1931 I had not heard any talk about this.
VYSHINSKY: But had there been any talk about it?
BESSONOV: In 1932 Pyatakov spoke about it, without, it is
true, dealing with it in detail.
VYSHINSKY: What did he say?
BESSONOV: In 1932 Pyatakov said that contact had been
established.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, in 1932 the task of making such contact
had been carried out?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances?
BESSONOV: fn 1932 r met Pyatakov several times. He stayed
in Germany a very long time in connection with the trade nego.
tiations. I saw him very ·often, and during one of his conversations
·
with me he told me about it.
VYSHINSKY: In short, that the Trotskyite group had been
organized under the leadership of its centre, that the Zinovievites
had joined it, and that at that period, as far as you know, negotia.
tions were going on with the Bukharinites?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to ask Bukharin.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, can you corroborate Bessonov's evidence that at that period your group was negotiating
with the Zinovievite organization about your work?
BUKHARIN: In my testimony during the preliminary examination I stated in detail that attempts at establishing contact between
the Rights and the Zinovievites, and later on also the Trotskyites,
had been made even before that.
VYSHINSKY: You-accused Bukharin, and also Rykov and
Tornsky-were carrying on negotiations with Pyatakov and other
Trotskyites concerning united operations against the Soviet
power?

42

BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You corroborate this?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY (to Bessonov): Continue your explanation.
BESSONOV: Pyatakov put before me the task of organizing
systematic and constant connections with Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: What did you do definitely in this respect?
BESSONOV: After several talks with him on this subject (this
was in the beginning of May 1931), and on his advice, I, with a
letter of recommendation from Pyatakov, found Trotsky's son,
Sedov, in Berlin, and through him conveyed Pyatakov's first letter
to Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, where, when, at what time and under
what circumstances did you hand him the letter?
BESSONOV: Sedov was then the centre of attention of the
German, I would say, gutter press, because before that something
had happened to his sister-Trotsky's daughter-as a result of
which the German press wrote a great deal about Trotsky, about his
children, and in particular about Sedov, who at that time was
studying at the Berlin Polytechnicum. It was not difficult for me
to find Sedov, just as it was not difficult to find any person in Ber.
lin, as I had very many ccmnections in Berlin. I could have estab.
lished contact with Sedov in any way, but on Pyatakov's advice,
not to advertise the matter, I used an address which he gave in a
Berlin daily newspaper. . .•
VYSHINSKY: ... And at this address?
BESSONOV: ... And at this address, at the end of May 1931,
with Pyatakov's letter of recommendation, I found Sedov and had
a brief c.onversation with him.
VYSH INSKY: Had Sedov known you before that?
BESSONOV: No, he had not.
VYSH INSKY: You were quite a new person to him?
BESSONOV: Yes, I was.
VYSHINSKY: Then why did Sedov agree to discuss this sub·
ject with a person who was a stranger to him?
BESSONOV: I gave him Pyatakov's letter-that was enough.
VYSH !NSKY: And after that?
BESSONOV: After that he talked with me rather in detail
about the question of organizing this correspondence. He at once
said that it was not a matter of one or two letters that one could
take for delivery, but of establishing systematic connections.
VYSHINSKY: What was the upshot of your conversation with
Sedov?
BESSONOV: He thought that it was necessary, if we were
going to set ourselves the task of establishing permanent connec·
tions, to appoint a special person who was less prominent than he,

43

Sedov. After some time, having met Sedov in a manner previously
agreed upon, at one of the railway stations in Berlin, I handed him
Pyatakov's Jetter to Trotsky, which Trotsky received, and to which
in a relatively short time a reply was received. At the same time
I handed over the first sum of money which Pyatakov had given me.
VYSHINSKY: What money?
BESSONOV: He had given me 2,000 marks to hand over to
Sedov specially for the purpose of covering expenses connected
with the sending of the first letters.
VYSHINSKY: What money was this?
BESSONOV: I don't know. Pyatakov had rather large sums
at his disposal.
VYSHINSKY: What sums were these; did they belong to him
personally?
BESSONOV: I don't think they belonged to Pyatakov.
VYSHINSKY: Whose were they, then?
BESSONOV: It was money that belonged to the Soviet state,
placed at the disposal of Pyatakov as Chairman of the Negotiations Committee....
VYSHINSKY: For what purpose?
BESSONOV: I think it was placed at his disposal for what are
called entertainment expenses.
•
VYSHINSKY: That is, expenses connected with his official
duties?
BESSONOV: Yes, of course. But this money was used for the
purpose of organizing the first connections with Trotsky.
VYSH INSKY: How would you qualify this, considering the present situation, in the language of the Criminal Code? How can this
utilization of other people's money for criminal purposes be qualified?
BESSONOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps I can help you?
BESSONOV: I think you can do it better than I. What coming
from me just now may sound insincere and unconvincing will
sound real if it comes from you.
VYSHINSKY: It follows then that Pyatakov stole government
money? He stole this money and sent it for the purpose of helping
the Trotskyite organization?
BESSONOV: Yes, that is quite true.
VYSHINSKY: And you helped him to do this?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: He stole the money and you helped him by conveying from Pyatakov 2,000 marks which belonged to the Soviet
state?
BESSONOV: Yes, that is so, but money transactions with Sedov

44

ended with this, because, as far as I remember, at that period no
more than three letters were sent and received through Sedov.
VYSHINSKY: Did money transactions with the Trotskyites
end entirely with this?
BESSONOV: I prefer to deal with this later, because I have to
mention a number of facts on this question. I must say that, of
course, money transactions with the Trotskyites did not end with
this.
VYSHINSKY: They continued?
BESSONOV: I would not say that there was direct financing
with Soviet money ....
VYSHINSKY: But what took place?
BESSONOV: But what took place was the utilization of the
situation in Germany at the time and of a Soviet official position
for the purpose of receiving considerable funds for illegal Trotskyite work. There can be no doubt about that.
VYSHINSKY: The financing of the Trotskyite organization
at the expense of the interests of the Soviet state continued?
BESSONOV: Certainly.
VYSHINSKY: Continue.
BESSONOV: At my first meeting with Sedov he raised the
question of appointing a special person for permanent connections
with Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: Was that on Sedov's initiative?
BESSONOV: Yes. I told Pyatakov about it. He thought it
was quite right and soon after (this was in the beginning of July,
or at the end of June, 1931) he introduced me to engineer Reich,
who at that time was working in the Iron and Steel Department
of the Berlin Trade Representation, a man who knew Europe
very well, in particular the European iron and steel industry,
had lived in different countries and spoke several European languages.
VYSHINSKY: But principally?
BESSONOV: Principally, he had been a Trotskyite since 1923.
VYSHINSKY: Until that moment you had not known him?
BESSONOV: Until that moment I had not known him.
VYSHINSKY: Not at all?
BESSONOV: Not at all.
VYSHINSKY: And you had not met him?
BESSONOV: I had seen him now and again in the corridors
of the Trade Representation.
·
VYSHINSKY: Since you had seen him in the Trade Representation you must have known him.
BESSONOV: I did not know his name.
VYSHINSKY: Very well, but you knew him by sight? You
45

knew that there W<J.S a man named Reich, but you were not acquainted with him?
BESSONOV: That is so, until I was introduced to him ....
VYSHINSKY: Did you know Reich before Pyatakov introduced
him to you as a Trotskyite?
BESSONOV: As a member of the staff of the Trade Representation.
VYSHINSKY: He was not a new man to you?
BESSONOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Only you did not know that he was connected
with Trotsky?
BESSONOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: And it was Pyatakov who connected you with
him as a Trotskyite?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And when did Reich become johannson?
BESSONOV: Reich said that the technique of connections
was a very simple, uncomplicated matter; true, it required a
fairly large amount of money and considerable modesty on the
part of the man who was serving as the connection. But for a member of the staff of the Soviet Trade Representation, who travelled
everywhere with a Soviet passport, it was a rather difficult matter,
because at every frontier he attracted special attention, and because of this it was necessary to find another man who could do
this connection work in such a way as to be able to come and go
across the frontier without rousing suspicion.
When this was reported to Pyatakov he said that there was no
sense in looking for a foreigner for this purpose, and that Reich
could be made a foreigner. And indeed, Reich did become a foreigner, that is to say, in 1931, I think it was in December, Reich
succeeded, not without the aid of the Trotskyites, in transforming
himself into Karl johannson.
VYSH IN SKY: With the aid of the Trotskyites?
BESSONOV: Yes, with the aid of the Trotskyites.
VYSHINSKY: With the aid of the Trotskyites he obtained
a pa~sport?
BESSONOV: I know that obtaining a passport means bribing
officials. I do not exclude the possibility that this took place
with the financial assistance of the Trotskyites, because Pyatakov
told me that it would cost a certain amount of money.
VYSHINSKY: The Trotskyites obtained the passport?
BESSONOV: They obtained the passport of a naturalized
Danish citizen.
VYSHINSKY: But all this was a fake, as a matter of fact
he is not a Dane, had never been to Denmark before that.
BESSONOV: He had never been to Denmark.
46

VYSHINSKY: What sort of a naturalization was it if he had
never been to Denmark?
BESSONOV: The passport was an official one, a real one.
VYSHINSKY: But actually?
BESSONOV: Actually there was a double citizenship. At the
end of I931, or the beginning of I932, Reich, while a Soviet citizen
and a member of the staff of the Trade Representation, thanks to
the assistance of the Trotskyites and money, became a Danish
citizen. In the spring of 1932 he was commissioned to go to Moscow,
but he did not return to Moscow and became a deserter. And from
that time I knew him as Johannson, who served as liaison man
between me and Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: Reich became a Dane and a deserter. He was
a double.
BESSONOV: For some period of time he had two citizenships,
of which one-Soviet citizenship-was open, and the Danish
citizenship was secret.
. VYSHINSKY: Which citizenship was open?
BESSONOV: The Soviet citizenship, but the Danish citizenship. was secret.
VYSHINSKY: Hence this was a swindle, and in addition,
desertion, and when a Soviet citizen becomes a deserter it is treason,
he thereby betrays his country.
BESSONOV: Certainly.
VYSHINSKY: You knew about this and helped it, is tha~
right?
BESSONOV: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: Did this Reich play an important role as a
liaison man in Trotskyite affairs?
BESSONOV: Undoubtedly, he played an important role.
I know that Reich carried out commissions for Trotsky in a number
of other countries. I want to speak only about what I know.
VYSHINSKY: We are not ·interested in what you surmise,
but in what you know.
BESSONOV: His work consisted of systematically bringing
and taking correspondence. Secondly, he arranged meetings with
Trotsky or Sedov whenever that was necessary.
VYSHINSKY: Meetings with you?.
BESSONOV: I have in mind the meeting with Pyatakov in
1932. Then I have in mind the meeting between Krestinsky and
Trotsky which took place in October 1933.
VYSHINSKY: Hence in October 1933, with Reich's assistance,
a meeting was arranged between Krestinsky and Trotsky?
BESSONOV: Yes, a meeting was arranged between Krestinsky
and Trotsky.
47

VYSHINSKY: How did you know that Reich arranged this
meeting?
BESSONOV: Except for Pyatakov and myself, nobody knew
of Reich's existence.
VYSH INS KY: But did Krestinsky know of Reich's existence?
BESSONOV: Probably he knew.
VYSHINSKY: Why do you suppose this?
BESSONOV: Krestinsky had worked in Berlin as Ambassador.
VYSHINSKY: Reich visited the Embassy in his official capacity, did he not?
BESSONOV: Certainly.
VYSHINSKY: How did this Reich arrange the meeting between Krestinsky and Trotsky?
BESSONOV: I cannot tell the Court what the technical arrangements for this meeting really were, for I do not know.
VYSHINSKY: But what can you tell?
BESSONOV: When Krestinsky, in the late summer of 1933,
came to Germany for a cure, he stayed for a long time in Berlin.
He had two conversations with me which -could be characterized
as conversations between members of the Trotskyite organization.
The first conversation was about the arrangements for the meeting
between Trotsky and Krestinsky.
VYSHINSKY: Who desired this meeting, Trotsky or Krestinsky?
BESSONOV: Krestinsky. It must be said that this was not
an easy task at that time. At that time Trotsky to a certain degree
had become the centre of European attention, a great deal was
being written about him in the newspapers, and it was not easy
under those circumstances to arrange a meeting with him. I had
no doubt that johannson had wide connections and could arrange
this matter without difficulty. I asked him to come to Berlin,
and shortly afterwards he returned and reported that the meeting
could take place in October 1933.
VYSHINSKY: When?
BESSONOV: In October 1933.
VYSHINSKY: Hence you helped Krestinsky to arrange a
meeting with Trotsky?
BESSONOV: Krestinsky knew that I had arranged the matter,
but how I had arranged it, Krestinsky did not know.
VYSHINSKY: The technical side?
BESSONOV: Yes, the technical side.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, we may establish the following facts:
the first is that Krestinsky travelled through Berlin.
BESSONOV: I think that was in September, or the end of
August, 1933.
VYSHINSKY: Where was he going?

48

BESSONOV: io Kissinget1.
VYSHINSKY: What for?
BESSONOV: To take a cure. He stopped at the Trade Representation and I had a talk with him. Twice we talked on Trotskyite subjects.
VYSHINSKY: And he says that he was never a Trotskyite.
Perhaps he censured the Trotskyites? You heard him say here that
he was not a Trotskyite. Is that right or wrong?
BESSONOV: (Smiles.)
VYSHINSKY: Why are you smiling?
BESSONOV: I am smiling because the reason why I am
standing here is that Nikolai Nikolayevich Krestinsky named me
the liaison man with Trotsky. Besides him and Pyatakov
nobody knew about this. And if Krestinsky had not spoken to
me about this in December 1933 I would not be in the dock
now.
VYSHINSKY: So you think that you are obliged to him for
this? Permit me to ask the accused Krestinsky.
Accused Krestinsky, did you really travel to Kissingen in
1933, in August or September?
KRESTINSKY: In the beginning of September.
VYSHINSKY: Do you confirm this fact?
KRESTINSKY: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Did you see Bessonov?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk to him?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What about? The weather?
KRESTINSKY: He was counsellor to the Embassy in Berlin.
At that time he was acting as charge d'affaires. He informed me
about the political situation in Germany, about the frame of mind
of the fascist party, which at that time was in power, and about
their program and attitude towards the U.S.S.R.
VYSHINSKY: And about Trotskyite affairs?
KRESTINSKY: We did not talk about them. I was not a
Trotskyite.
VYSHINSKY: You never talked about them?
KRESTINSKY: Never.
VYSHINSKY: That means that Bessonov is not telling the
truth, and that you are telling the truth. Do you always tell the
truth?
KRESTINSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Not always. Accused Krestinsky, you and
I will have to examine serious matters and there is no need to
get excited. Consequently, Bessonov is not telling the truth?
KRESTINSKY: No.
4

49

VYSHINSKY: But you too do not always tell the truth. Is
that not so?
KRESTINSKY: I did not always tell the truth during the
investigation.
VYSHINSKY: But at other times you always tell the truth?
KRESTINSKY: The truth.
-VYSH INSKY: Why this lack of respect for the investigation,
why during the investigation did you tell untruths? Explain.
KRESTINSKY: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: I hear no reply. I have no further questions.
Accused Bessonov, when did your conversations with Krestinsky
about Trotskyite affairs take place?
BESSONOV: The conversation in Berlin was not the first,
but the second.
VYSHINSKY: And where did the first take place?
BESSONOV: The first took place in Moscow in May 1933.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances? When did you
speak to Krestinsky about Trotskyite affairs in Moscow, and what
exactly did you talk about?
BESSONOV: After I returned to Moscow from England with
the whole trade organization, I was appointed counsellor to the
Soviet Embassy in Germany. Before assuming that post I had a
long conversation with Pyatakov and Krestinsky.
VYSHINSKY: I am not interested in Pyatakov just now;
I am interested in Krestinsky. Where did you talk to him?
BESSONOV: In Krestinsky's office in the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs.
VYSHINSKY: Was it about Trotskyite matters?
BESSONOV: Yes, Krestinsky told me that in accordance
with a talk he had with Pyatakov, and on the latter's recommendation, he deemed it necessary to talk to me absolutely frankly
about the tasks that confronted me in Berlin. He said that he had
already spoken to the Germans about my appointment, the Moscow
Germans-referring to the German Embassy in Moscow.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bessonov, you have not forgotten
the warning I gave at the beginning of the hearing?
BESSONOV: What I want to say will probably in no way
reflect on the honour of any Embassy. He said that Germany
was pleased with my appointment because I had worked for
a long time in Germany, knew Germany well and they knew me,
and from that standpoint they were pleased that they would have
a man they knew. The real meaning of this remark, of course,
was what Pyatakov had very vividly formulated several times
earlier and what Krestinsky had told me before, namely, that
my work in Germany during 1931-32 had undoubtedly
earned me, as a member of the Trotskyite organization, definite
50

popularity and sympathy amortg certain circles of German industrialists and partly of German military men, a popularity which
should now be utilized for new purposes. Krestinsky formulated
these purposes as follows.
VYSHINSKY: Briefly, because I think that Krestinsky will
_
himself talk about these purposes later.
BESSONOV: To formulate quite briefly Krestinsky's ideas
and the commission I received from him, it was that I, in my
capacity of counsellor to the Berlin Embassy, must first and foremost devote my energies to hampering and if possible preventing
the normalization of relations between the Soviet Union and
Germany along the usual, normal diplomatic lines.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Krestinsky, do you recall such "diplomatic" conversations with Bessonov?
KRESTINSKY: No, we never had such conversations.
VYSHINSKY: Were there no diplomatic conversations at all?
KRESTINSKY: I did not quite catch what Bessonov said
just now. You can't hear well from here.
VYSHINSKY: But you are sitting quite close to him.
KRESTINSKY: From the back here you can't hear very well
what Bessonov is saying.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to request you, Comrade President,
to have Krestinsky sit nearer to Bessonov so that he might hear
him better. Otherwise I am afraid that at the most important
moments Krestinsky's hearing will fail him.
(Krestinsky seats himself nearer to Bessonov.)
VYSHINSKY: I request Bessonov specially for Krestinsky's
benefit to repeat what he said; and I would ask Krestinsky to
listen carefully, to keep his ears open.
BESSONOV: I repeat, the commission which I at that time
received from Krestinsky was that in my post of counsellor to the
Berlin Embassy of the U.S.S.R., where I, of course, enjoyed definite opportunities for the accomplishment of this commission,
I was by every means open to me-naturally observing all due
diplomatic decorum-to hamper, hinder and prevent the normalization of relations between the Soviet Union and Germany along
normai diplomatic lines, and in this way to compel the Germans
to seek for illegal, non-diplomatic, secret, clandestine means of
arriving at an agreement with the Trotskyite organization.
VYSHINSKY: Did you hear that?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have any conversations with Bessonov
in May 1933?
KRESTINSKY: I had conversations with Bessonov before he
left for Berlin.
4*

51

VYSHINSKY: You had. Do you remember what they were
about?
KRESTINSKY: I do not remember the details.
VYSHINSKY: You do not remember the details, but Bessonov
does.
KRESTINSKY: There was not a word said about the Troiskyite
stand.
VYSHINSKY: Did you say what he was to do abroad, or did
you not?
KRESTfNSKY: Of course I did.
VYSHINSKY: You did say what he was to do?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What was he to do?
KRESTINSKY: He was to try to create normal relations as
far as possible.
VYSHINSKY: As far as possible. But if it was impossible?
KRESTINSKY: If he did not succeed, it would be another matter.· But he was to try.
VYSH I NSKY: Accused Bessonov, is what Krestinsky says true?
BESSONOV: Absolutely untrue. What is more, during this
conversation Krestinsky gave me detailed organizational instructions how I was to communicate with him in the future. Apart from
the official letters which the Emb1ssy in Germany exchanges with
the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, I was to maintain
correspondence with Krestinsky. And if in this correspondence
Krestinsky were to say that his view on current questions of SovietGerman relations was such-and-such, and that he advised waiting
for official instructions o·n this question, that would mean that
I was to act in accordance with his "personal" point of view,
irrespective of what the official instructions might be.
And, finally, Krestinsky referred me to Stern, his immediate
subordinate along Trotskyite lines and along official lines, so that
I might get addresses for the establishment of connections with
Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: You hear that Bessonov speaks in fairly great
detail about your conversations, which are far from bearing the character you attribute to them. What about it?
KRESTINSKY: There were no such conversations, although
during the confrontation which took place in January I admitted
part of the conversation.
VYSH INSKY: At the confrontation with Bessonov you admitted
this part?
KRESTfNSKY: Yes.
VYSHJNSKY: So there was such a conversation?
KRESTINSKY: No.

52

. VYSHINSKY: So what Bessonov says must be understood the
other way round?
KRESTINSKY: Not always.
VYSH !NSKY: But what about your admission?
KREST!NSKY: During the investigation I gave false testimony several times.
VYSHINSKY: You said: "I did not formally belong to the
Trotskyite centre." Is that true. or not?
KRESTINSKY: I did not belong to it at all.
VYSHINSKY: You say that formally you did not belong. What
is true and what is not true here? Perhaps it is all true, or it is all
untrue, or only half of it is true? What percentage, how many grams
of it are true?
KRESTINSKY: r did not belong to the Trotskyite centre because I was not a Trotskyi te.
VYSHINSKY: You were not a Trotskyite?
KRESTINSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Never?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, r was a Trotskyite until 1927.
THE PRESIDENT: At the beginning of the trial you said in
reply to my question that you had never been a Trotskyite. That
is what you said.
KRESTTNSKY: I said that I am not a Trotskyite.
VYSH INS KY: And so you were a Trotskyite until 1927?
KRESTTNSKY: f was.
VYSHINSKY: And when did you stop being a Trotskyite in
19277
KRESTINSKY: just before the Fifteenth Party Congress.
VYSH INSKY: Recall the date.
KRESTINSKY: I date my rupture with Trotsky and Trotskyism
from November 27, 1927, when, through Serebryakov, who had·
returned from America and was in Moscow, I sent Trotsky a sharp
letter containing sharp criticism ....
VYSHlNSKY: That letter is not in the records. We have another letter-your letter to Trotsky.
KRESTINSKY: The letter I am referring to is in the possession of the Court investigator, because it was taken from me during
the search, and r request this letter to be attached to the records.
VYSHINSKY: The records contain a letter dated July 11, 1927,
taken from you during the search.
KRESTINSKY: But there is another letter of November 27 ...•
VYSHINSKY: There is no such letter.
KRESTINSKY: That cannot be....
VYSHINSKY: We are just now conducting the Court investigation, and you yourself said that during the pr~limin~ry investigation you did not always tell the truth. You said durmg the pre-

53

liminary investigation that you did not formally belong to the centre.
That means that during the preliminary investigation you admitted
that in general you were, actually speaking, a member of the Trotskyite centre. Did you admit this during the preliminary investigation?
KRESTINSKY: No, I did not.
VYSHINSKY: In your testimony (pp. 9 and 10) you said:
"Formally I did not belong .... '' This can be taken as meaning
that you did belong, but not formally. Is that so?
KRESTINSKY: I did not belong to the Trotskyite centre at
all.
VYSHINSKY: That means that you testified falsely?
KRESTINSKY: I have already stated that this testimony of
mine does not conform to the facts.
VYSHINSKY: When f interrogated you during the preliminary
investigation, were you telling me the truth?
KRESTINSKY: No.
VYSHfNSKY: Why did you tell untruths? Did f ask you to
tell untruths?
KRES'.f INSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Did I ask you to tell the truth?
KRESTINSKY: You did.
VYSHINSKY: Why, when I asked you to tell the truth, did
you nevertheless tell untruths, compel the investigator to write
them down, and then sign it? Why?
KRESTINSKY: At the preliminary investigation, before I
was questioned by you, r had given false testimony.
VYSHINSKY: ... And then you stuck to it.
KRESTINSKY: ... And then I stuck to it, because from personal experience I had arrived at the conviction that before the
trial, if there was to be one, I would not succeed in refuting my testimony.
VYSHINSKY: And do you think that you have succeeded in
refuting it now1
KRESTINSKY: No, that is not the important thing. The important thing is that r declare that I do not admit myself to be a
Trotskyite. r am not a Trotskyite.
VYSHTNSKY: You stated that you were on a special conspiratorial footing. What does this "special conspiratorial footing"
mean?
KRESTfNSKY: Well, you know....
VYSHINSKY: Don't make me a witness in this case. ram asking
you, what does "special conspiratorial footing" mean?
KRESTINSKY: That was said in my testimony ....
VYSHINSKY: You do not want to answer my questions.
KRESTINSKY: This phrase about my being on a special con54

KRESTINSKY: I simply considered that if I were to say what
I am saying today-that it was not in accordance with the factsmy declaration would not reach the leaders of the Party and the
government.
VYSHINSKY: But you signed the protocol?
KRESTINSKY: I did.
VYSHINSKY: You remember that I directly asked you whether
you had any declarations or complaints to make against the investigator. Was that not so?
KRESTINSKY: It was.
VYSHINSKY: Did you answer me?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did I ask whether you had any complaints,
or not?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, and I answered that I had no complaints.
VYSHINSKY: If you were asked whether you had complaints,
you should have answered that you had.
KRESTINSKY: I had in the sense that I did not speak voluntarily.
VYSHINSKY: I shall read the reply which you gave the investigator Sheinin to the question put. Krestinsky's reply (p. 103):
"I have no complaints to make against the investigator."
KRESTINSKY: I confirm that.
VYSHINSKY: You confirm it?
KRESTINSKY: I do.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions. I have a question to
ask Bessonov.
Accused Bessonov, why do you mention facts which Krestinsky
denies and contradicts?
BESSONOV: I do not know any other facts.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you are mixing things up? Perhaps it
was not Krestinsky but somebody else?
BESSONOV: No, I had a number of other talks with Krestinsky.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, were your relations with Krestinsky at
that period good, friendly, or bad?
BESSONOV: I would not ~ay that my relations with Krestinsky
were very good, but all the same I would say that they were just
good.
VYSHINSKY: May I ask the accused Krestinsky?
Accused Krestinsky, what are your relations with Bessonov like,
good or bad?
KRESTINSKY: Good.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to ask Rosengoltz.
Accused Rosengoltz, what were your relations with Krestinsky
like? Good?
ROSENOOLTZ: I never had any differences with him.
59

VYSHINSKY: In what sphere?
ROSENGOL TZ: Not in any sphere. There was complete agreement in a 11 spheres.
VYSHINSKY: Including the sphere of underground work.
Allow me to ask Krestinsky.
Accused Krestinsky, what were your relations with Rosengoltz
like?
KRESTINSKY: Our relations were not bad. We had differences
on questions of foreign policy.
VYSHINSKY: Were your relations with Rosengoltz good or
bad?
KRESTINSKY: Not bad.
VYSHINSKY: Not bad, that means good?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What were your relations with prinko like?
Allow me to ask the accused Grinko.
Accused Grinko, what were your relations with Krestinsky
like?
GRINKO: I consider that they were good.
VYSHINSKY: And what do you consider, accused Krestinsky?
KRESTINSKY: They were good.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Krestinsky, here are three men on
good terms with you who say what is not true?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Let us continue the interrogation of Bessonov.
Accused Bessonov, what were your subsequent conversations
with Krestinsky about?
BESSO NOV: In 1933 I had another conversation with him about
the situation that had arisen in German industrial circles in connection with a certain dropping off of Soviet orders in Germany.
I said that a certain disappointment existed among German industrialists with the course of development of Soviet-German economic relations. rn this connection Krestinsky, even more sharply
than in May, stressed that it was my duty to make it clear to the
German industrialists that there could be no serious and important
relations with the Soviet Union as long as the present leadership
was in power in the Soviet Union. The more German industrial and
military circles became disillusioned as to the possibility of normalizing relations with the Soviet Union, even diplomatic relations, the more readily and the more resolutely would they make
for an agreement with the groups that were fighting the Soviet
power. He stated that the task was a very difficult one, but after
all, he said, you are a diplomat. It is true that at that time I was a
young diplomat, but the task he assigned me I carried out.
When Krestinsky was passing through Berlin he spoke of the
soundings that Rosenberg, the leader of the Foreign Affairs Depart-

60

ment of the National-Socialist Party of Germany, had at that time
made in our circles on the question of a possible secret agreement between the National-Socialists in Germany and the Russian
Trotskyites, in particular and especially on the question of a raw
material base for Germany, and in this connection on the question
of the Ukraine. These soundings became known to me through Krestinsky. Krestinsky summoned me on the day of his departure for Kis
singen. He was very agitated by this news, and asked my advice
as to what should be done. And in this connection he emphasized
that the soundings made by Rosenberg referred to the presence of
Krestinsky in Berlin. Krestinsky's real character was fairly well
known to Rosenberg and to other German public men. This news
therefore had a quite definite political meaning. In this connection
Krestinsky asked me to hasten his meeting with Trotsky, because
he considered it expedient to receive instructions on this important
question. Thus you have the three conversations, or the three main
themes which developed during Nikolai Nikolayevich Krestinsky's
stay in Berlin in September 1933. I did not see him on his return
from Meran. I only saw him the following year, when actually there
was nothing particularly new he could tell me about his conversation with Trotsky; nevertheless, I learnt that the conversation in
the main amounted to an approbation of the line which had apparently been laid down earlier and of which Nikolai Nikolayevich
had spoken to me in general outline when I was leaving for Berlin
in May 1933, that is, a few months before this. And in addition to
all the points about which I have already spoken, and which I learnt
from Pyatakov, there was also the point that he, Nikolai Nikolayevich Krestinsky, and some other, whom he referred to as
"we," were sounding the ground and establishing definite contact
with military circles in the Soviet Union. And in this connection
he mentioned the names of Tukhachevsky and Uborevich, which
later, as he himself informed me, was confirmed in Meran.
Another point in this Meran meeting which I know about, and
which is also nothing but a development of the tactics which
formerly existed and which were outlined during concrete negotiations in 1931, was the achievement of a special agreement of the
opposition groups in the Soviet Union in the struggle for power,
an agreement with foreign states which might help them in this
matter. This agreement was to be with the National-Socialist Party
of Germany, not as it is officially expressed, but in different circles, which I do not think it necessary to dwell upon specially
just now, because it would lead me very far from the question you
have put.
I repeat that as a development of these tactics there was in
the Meran discussions between Nikolai Nikolayevich Krestinsky and Trotsky, a line which in its first version was a most
61

precise and clear formulation of defeatist tactics, although
as a matter of fact, and this is what I said even at the confrontation with Krestinsky, essentially it was in effect defeatist
tactics already when he was concluding the trade agreement
which was being carried out when he was Ambassador in Germany, and these defeatist tactics were pursued by Pyatakov
during the economic negotiations and were now being laid down
as the basic tactics.
Many of the points in the talks between Krestinsky and Trotsky
in Meran I learnt from Krestinsky himself. Johannson 's information confirmed the meeting, and as far as I understood from my
talks with johannson, the meeting took place in Meran in the
Hotel Meranhof-I do not remember its exact name. It should
not be forgotten that this was in October, during what is known
as the grape season in Meran, and that at this time it is made easy
for people to travel to Meran for the grape season and back again.
And I fully concede that Trotsky might well have managed to do
this, although at that time it was extremely difficult for Trotsky
to disappear from France.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us about your Trotskyite underground
activities in the period immediately following this.
BESSO NOV: I should like to finish what I have to say about the
organization of the liaison point. The liaison point was organized
in 1931 and existed until 1937, and, as the Berlin liaison point, disappeared when r left Berlin for the Soviet Union in February 1937.
During this period a large number of letters had been received
from and sent to Trotsky. I cannot just now remember how many,
but at any rate it was a matter of six or seven letters of instruction
in both directions a year. In addition there were a number of
letters that were sent through the diplomatic mails. Moreover,
there were letters sent through the diplomatic mails written on
foreign letter-heads, chiefly of German and Belgian firms, which
conveyed most urgent information written in business language.
It was the purpose of this liaison point to arrange personal meetings.
johannson was the man who made the trip to Oslo with Pyatakov,
and whose name he refrained from mentioning when he testified
before the Military Collegium in January 1937.
VYSHINSKY: From whom did you learn that Johannson organized Pyatakov's trip and meeting wiih Trotsky in Oslo?
BESSONOV: From Pyatakov and Johannsen themselves.
VYSHINSKY: From Pyatakov and Johannsen themselves.
Go on.
BESSONOV: Finally, in 1932 I knew there had been a meeting
with Sedov. I did not consider it possible to mention this subject
while speaking on the significance of this Berlin liaison point in
a number of meetings; but I will not talk about it because I do

62

not know it. I mig~t also mention that with and by Johannson 's help
contact was organized and the conditions for a preliminary agreement arran~ed between the Trotskyitesand the Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia, headed by Maslov, who was in Prague. I can give more
detailed testimony on this point, because I took a direct part
in these negotiations.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us about the meeting with Trotsky in
Paris in 1934. What exactly did Trotsky instruct you to do, and
what exactly did you do in fulfilment of these instructions?
BESSONOV: I received a short letter through Johannsen, a
note from Trotsky, in which he wrote about arranging a meeting
with one of the Trotskyites in Germany to inform him about the
events of June 30 in Germany. I was the only person who could
go. At the end of July 1934 I arrived in Paris by the day train and
also left by the day train. The whole talk took place in a hotel at
which johannson always stayed. Trotsky said that he knew me
very well from Pyatakov's letters and from Krestinsky's accounts.
VYSHINSKY: What did you and Trotsky say about your underground Trotskyite tasks?
BESSONOV: He imposed on his followers working in the diplomatic field the task of adopting the line of sabotaging official
agreements in order to stimulate the interest of the Germans in
unofficial agreements with opposition groups. "They will come to
us yet," said Trotsky, referring to Hess and Rosenberg. He said
that we must not be squeamish in this matter, and that we might
be ensured real and important help from Hess and Rosenberg.
He said we must not stop short at consenting to big cessions of
territory.
VYSHINSKY: Which exactly?
BESSONOV: We shall consent to the cession of the Ukraine,
Trotsky said. Bear that in mind in your work and in your negotiations with the Germans, and I shall also write about it to Pyatakov and Krestinsky. He then dealt with questions connected with
the work of the Trotskyite organizations in the Soviet Union and
particularly stressed the fact that under conditions when an inevitable war was brewing the only possible way in which the Trotskyites could come to power was by the defeat of the Soviet Union
in that war.
He then dwelt on the methods of work of the Trotskyite organizations in the Soviet Union, particularly emphasizing the necessity of resorting to the most extreme terrorist methods of struggle. At this point he mentioned the words which are contained in
the indictment and which were read out here today, namely, that
it would be unpardonable squeamishness were we, his followers
in the Soviet Union, not to proceed now to the direct extermination
and removal of Stalin and all his immediate followers.

63

Quite unexpectedly, he dwelt in this cotlnection on Maxim
Gorky, saying that the part played by Maxim Gorky was ex~remely
exceptional in view of his influence not only in the Soviet Umon, but
above all abroad. He referred to Gorky's extremely close friendship
with Stalin and said that Maxim Gorky's utterances were most
definitely driving away from Trotsky many of his followers among
the European intelligentsia and bringing them closer to the position of the leadership of the Party. And in this connection he
had arrived at the conclusion, which he openly expressed to me,
that Gorky must be removed, mentioning those words which were
quoted here about the necessity of physically exterminating Gorky
at all costs. Such were his instructions.
VYSHINSKY: Did you transmit them?
BESSONOV: Yes. Shortly after this, in the autumn of 1934,
I was in Moscow and gave a detailed account of this conversation
to Pyatakov.
VYSHINSKY: Go on.
BESSONOV: That, actually speaking, is all I can say about
my meeting with Trotsky in 1934.
VYSHINSKY: After 1934 did you have any meetings or conversations with leaders of the underground Trotskyite organization?
BESSONOV: Yes, I met Pyatakov every year until the year of
his arrest. I did not see him any more in the autumn of 1936.
Every time I came to Moscow I met Nikolai Nikolayevich Krestinsky, and in particular I met him in the autumn of 1936 after
Pyatakov's arrest.
VYSHINSKY: What did you talk about after Pyatakov's
arrest?
BESSONOV: At the very end of September, or in the early
part of October 1936, I met Krestinsky in Moscow. Krestinsky
in a state of great agitation told me that the affairs of the Trotskyite centre were in a very bad way. that there had been a number
of exposures, that Pyatakov, Radek and a number of others had
been arrested, that his own arrest was not out of the question, and
that he asked me, on my return to Berlin, immediately to send
written information on the subject to Trotsky. He said that, in
the event of his arrest, all the organizational contacts would have
to be transferred to Karakhan, although he had no idea how exactly
this was to be done. He asked me even to repeat it twice to show
whether I understood him when he said that the situation of the
Trotskyites in the Soviet Union in the autumn of 1936 must be
regarded as extremely serious and that the agreement reached by
the Trotskyites with the German National-Socialist Party on the
possibility of hastening war, which would facilitate the coming
to power of the Trotskyites, must be expedited at all costs.
On arriving in Berlin I reported this in detail to Trotsky and
64

feceived to my letter a reply frotn him, which I tra11stnitted to
Krestinsky. Then, this was in December 1936 or perhaps in the
early part of January 1937-more exactly in December 19361 received another letter from Krestinsky for Trotsky, which
I read but did not fully understand because it was written in
cryptic language.
VYSHINSKY: By whom was this letter written, to whom, and
when?
BESSONOV: This letter was written in December 1936 by
Krestinsky to Trotsky, and was transmitted by me.
VYSHINSKY: You transmitted it?
BESSONOV: I transmitted it through johannson in December 1936.
VYSHINSKY: On your arrival in Berlin?
BESSONOV: Yes, on my arrival in Berlin.
VYSHINSKY: You transmitted it through johannson?
BESSONOV: Yes, through johannson. And within a few days
I received a reply from Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: Did you acquaint yourself with this material?
BESSONOV: No, I do not know the reply.
VYSHINSKY: And are you acquainted with Krestinsky's letter?
BESSONOV: I read Krestinsky's letter because it was addressed
to me. But I can only give a general impression because the letter
was written iri very vague language known only to Krestinsky and
Trotsky, but not quite clear to me.
VYSHINSKY: What did you make of it?
BESSONOV: It said that the situation was such that the Trotskyites could not wait until the Germans got moving, and therefore they asked for permission to act before war broke out, before
the Germans attacked, with the help of the centre which they had
organized. What this centre was I can't say, because it was difficult to decipher the contents of this letter.
VYSHINSKY: What more would you like to add to your testimony, or have you completed your explanations?
BJ;:SSONOV: In reply to the last question asked, namely,
who took the greatest part and with whom were the most systematic
connections maintained, I must say that it was with Pyatakov, whom
I regarded as my immediate chief along Trotskyite lines, and with
whom I had meetings until the last time in December 1935, when
he told me about his visit to Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: Who were your immediate chiefs along Trotskyite lines?
.
BESSONOV: Only three men, with whom I communicated
and who knew about my work-Pyatakov, Krestinsky, and
Trotsky. Rosengoltz knew that I was a participant of the Trotsky.ite
organization. In the autumn of 1931, when I was connected with
5

65

the German neo·otiations, mutual relations We!'e established behveen
Arkady Pavlo~ich Rosengoltz and myself such as could exist only
between members of the Trotskyite organization. Moreover, Pyatakov recommended me to Rosengoltz as a member of the Trotskyite
organization.
VYSHINSKY (to Rosengoltz): Accused Rosengoltz, did you
know that Bessonov was a Trotskyite?
ROSENGOLTZ: No, I did not.
VYSHINSKY: Did not Pyatakov recommend him?
ROSENGOLTZ: I never talked to him on this subject.
VYSHINSKY: But did you know Bessonov was a Trotskyite?
ROSENGOLTZ: I knew it from Krestinsky.
VYSH INS KY: What did you learn from Krestinsky about
Bessonov?
ROSENGOLTZ: I learnt that he was a Trotskyite and that lle,
Bessonov, helped Krestinsky in Trotskyite work.
VYSHINSKY: Who told you that?
ROSENGOL TZ: Krestinsky told me.
VYSHINSKY: Krestinsky personally?
ROSENOOLTZ: Yes, Krestinsky personally.
VYSHINSKY: Do you remember in what year it was?
ROSENGOLTZ: I cannot say exactly.
VYSHINSKY: Roughly,. was it in 1933?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, roughly in that year.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances did he tell you this
and in what connection?
ROSENGOLTZ: He was telling me about the people in the
People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs who helped him in this
work, and among them mentioned Bessonov.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Krestinsky, did you hear this testimony?
KRESTINSKY: I deny it.
VYSHINSKY: You deny it?
KRESTINSKY: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Absolutely?
KRESTINSKY: Absolutely.
VYSHINSKY: Of course.
KRESTINSKY: Of course.
VYSHINSKY. I have no further questi-0ns.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for two hours.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court .of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A.BATNER
l\Iilitary Jurist First Rank

EVENING SESSION, MARCH 2, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Be seated.
The session is resumed. Comrade Vyshinsky, have you any
questions to put to Bessonov?
VYSHINSKY: Not to Bessonov.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the defence any questions to put to
Bessonov?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: Have any of the accused questions to put
to Bessonov? (Reply in the negative.)
We will proceed to the examination of the accused Grinko.
Accused Grinko, do you corroborate the testimony you gave
at the preliminary investigation?
GRINKO: I corroborate it wholly and entirely.
THE PRESIDENT: What questions have you to put, Comrade
Procurator?
VYSHINSKY: Accused Grinko, tell the Court about your criminal activities.
GRINKO: In order that the path by which I arrived at committing the enormous chain of crimes against the Soviet power and the
country, at treason to the country, may be clear, I must recall
that I joined the Communist Party as one of the Borotbiststhe Ukrainian nationalist organization. A large group of the
leaders of the Borotbists: Shumsky, Poloz, Blakitny, 1-Grinko
-Lyubchenko, and others who merged with the Communist Party
of the Ukraine, continued to adhere to and later intensified our
bourgeois-nationalist position.
I can enumerate the main stages in the development of the
nationalist, conspiratorial, counter-revolutionary work of this
Borotbist nucleus.
The first stage was the period approximately of 1925-26.
This is what is called the period of Shumsky-ism. Already at that
time Shumsky-ism was in all essentials a program of severing
the Ukraine from the U.S.S.R., a program of bourgeois-nationalist restoration in the Ukraine. Already at that time it was
a sort of large-scale political reconnoitring by the nationalists,
5*

67

a trial of strength, the demand to discredit Russian towns in the
Ukraine, to discredit Russian cadres, etc.
Shumsky-ism was crushed politically and undermined organizationally.
.
The second stage ...
VYSHINSKY: You must tell us more about this stage.
What steps did the Borotbist organization take in that period
in the direction of foreign relations?
GRINKO: In that period no steps in this direction were taken. This applies to the second period.
VYSHINSKY: What years do you limit this period to?
GRINKO: 1925-26. All that was done in this period was
that the connections between Shumsky and the capitalist elements
of Western Ukraine were firmly established.
VYSHINSKY: Only with these elements?
GRINKO: Yes. But I know nothing about connections with
the intelligence services and government circles of oi.her stai.es
in that period.
VYSHINSKY: You did not maintain them?
GRINKO: No.
VYSHINSKY: The facts that you relate occurred in the period of 1926?
GRINKO: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In your testimony you speak about reconnoitring. Was that nationalist reconnoitring?
GRINKO: The reconnoitring of the internal forces in the
Ukraine which might support a nationalist action.
VYSHINSKY: Hence it was a trial of nationalist forces?
GRINKO: That is what I said.
VYSHINSKY: What year does the second period cover?
GRINKO: 1929-32.
VYSH INSKY: In the first period, was there any connection
with the Rights?
GRINKO: There were no organizational connections with the
Rights, but undoubtedly the fight which the Trotskyites and
the Rights waged against the Party stimulated the nationalists.
There were no organizational connections.
VYSHINSKY: Can we say that this was to a certain extent a
self-contained nationalist organization?
GRINKO: Yes, but it had not yet taken definite shape.
VYSHINSKY: Did this organization come out on a wider arena?
GRINKO: It did, but in the next period.
VYSHINSKY: It did in the next period, from 1929-32 on.
Will you please tell us about your line in foreign politics?

.

68

GRINKO: If the Couri permits, I will deal with all my lines
in foreign politics in a special section.
VYSHINSKY: As you please.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
GRINKO: When this nationalist organization was smashed,
only fragments of it remained. But about 1929 a nationalist organization rev~ved again in Moscow, consisting of Shumsky, myself,
Poloz, Max1movich, Solodub and a number of others. This organization approached its program and its tactics differently from
the way it did in the first period. The relatively moderate position of the first period is to a certain extent to be explained by the
ideas we then had, when the N.E.P. was at its height. We considered thatthe evolution of the N.E.P. in the direction we desired was
not excluded. Ontheotherhand, we did not see in Europe the forces
in alliance with which we could advance more resolutely. In the
second period the situation changed-this was the period of the wide
Socialist offensive, when the positions of the capitalist elements
in the country had been severely undermined, when the evolution
of the N.E.P. towards capitalism was out of the question. Even
the blind could see this. Then we gradually put out feelers for
foreign political forces that could help us. In the second period
the Ukrainian nationalist organization had entirely taken up the
position of the Rights on general political questions, that is to
say, the position of fighting industrialization and collectivization.
Although the organization had no direct organizational connection
with the Right organization in this period, I personally had contacts with a number of rather second-rate individuals in the Right
camp.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have connections with Rykov at that
time?
GR INKO: In that period I had no political connections with
him. My connections with Rykov were established in a later period
-the period when the national-fascist organization was created,
with which I will deal later; this was in 1934-35. In this period
the nationalist organization gave its members instructions to collect forces and wage an active struggle, mainly against collectivization, and even to go to the lengths of organizing insurrection.
In this struggle we already had connections with certain circles
in a certain state which is hostile to the Soviet Union. These allies of ours helped us. To assist the partisan struggle they intensified
the smuggling of diversionists and Petliura emissaries, and arms,
etc., into the Ukraine. This connection was maintained through
Konar, through Kotsyubinsky. I don't know whether I ought
to mention all these states here.

69

VYSH INS KY: No, mention them at the session to be held in
camera.
THE PRESIDENT: And mention the names at the in camera
session.
VYSHINSKY: Did you personally take part in organizing the
smuggling of arms, etc.?
. .
GRINKO: I was kept informed about the negotiations and
gave my consent to them.
VYSHINSKY: Did you direct this business?
GRJNKO: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Continue.
GRINKO: This period came to an end at the beginning of
1933 owing to the arrest of nearly the whole of this group. I was
the only one not arrested. But I did not lay down my nationalist
arms in my fight against the Soviet power. In this period my
personal connections began with the fascist organizations abroad,
with influential elements in the fascist organizations, and with
certain government circles. The object of these connections was to
establish contact for the purpose of preparing for the severance
of the Ukraine from the U.S.S.R. and to organize the struggle
against the Soviet power.
I will give the detailed facts and names at the in camera session. Here I will only say that these connections were established
after a series of conversations I had with representatives of these
hostile circles who occupied rather prominent official positions
here in the U.S.S.R.
At the beginning of 1935 I heard from Lyubchenko about the
creation in the Ukraine of a national-fascist organization, the
object of which was to sever the Ukraine from the U.S.S.R.,
and which counted on receiving assistance in the shape of military
intervention on the part of those forces and elements with whom
J had already established personal contact at that time. The
national-fascist organization also set itself the aim of uniting
with the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," which had established
cont~d with the military conspirators.
When I learnt about this organization I agreed to join it.
I was commissioned to establish connections with the Right and
Trotskyite centre and with government circles of certain states
_hostile to the Soviet power, and to help Lyubchenko to develop
this work in the Ukraine.
_ At the time I joined it, the organization had already begun
to crystallize itself as a national~socia list organization.
Lyubchenko told me about this organization's centre in the
Ukraine, to which Lyubchenko, Poraiko and others belonged. He
told me that at the centre the question was being discussed of
the character of the party organization and the type of lJk~ai_n~

'70

ian state to be established if the organization was successful.
According to what Lyubchenko said the organization had taken the
path of creating a centralized party after the type of the national-socialist party. In the event of success the organization
intended to set up a bourgeois Ukrainian state after the type of
the fascist state .
.About this character of the organization I told a prominent
member of the Right and Trotskyite ~onspiracy, Yakovlev. In
the Right and Trotskyite circles with whom I had occasion to
speak, this tendency to transform our organization into a fascist
type of organization undoubtedly existed.
How did I carry out the tasks that were entrusted to me
by this national-fascist organization?
Firstly, connections with the Right and Trotskyite centre.
I maintained these connections with Gamarnik, Pyatakov and
Rykov. I established connections with Gamarnik through Lyubchenko, who had connections with Yakir and Gamarnik. Through
Gamarnik I established connections with Pyatakov, and then
with Rykov. Simultaneously I carried out tasks in foreign politics, in so far as Pyatakov and Oamarnik had told me that Trotsky
had agreed to paying compensation at the expense of the Ukraine
for the military assistance that we were to receive in our fight
against the Soviet power.
Simultaneously with the establishment of connections with
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" I accelerated the establishment of connections with foreign forces through Krestinsky,
with whom Pyatakov had connected me.
I established connections with Gamarnik, Pyatakov and Rykov
about the end of 1935.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us about your connections with Rykov.
What were these connections?
GRINKO: The connections were that the Ukrainian organization
came under the command of the Right and Trotskyite centre.
VYSHINSKY: In what .did it find expression?
GRINKO: It found expression firstly in that the Ukrainian organization received instructions from the Right and Trotskyite cen.tre. I, as a member of this organization, received instructions ...
VYSHINSKY: From whom did _you receive instructions?
GRINKO: From Rykov.
VYSHINSKY: Whom else?
ORINKO: Mainly from Rykov.
VYSHINSKY: Very well. Proceed.
GRINKO: In 1935 and the beginning of 1936 I had, in the main,
carried out the tasks entrusted to me by the Ukrainian organization. I had established connections with the Right and Trotskyite centre through Krestinsky and had established connections
71

with fascist circles in a foreign state which accepted the point
of view that we wanted. Through Krestinsky I conveyed the formula of our Ukrainian organization, and through him I received
the reply that the forces concerned had accepted this formula.
Having my old personal connections with fascist circles, I myself
later on verified this fact and received confirmation.
: VYSHINSKY: Permit me to dwell on this question. Hence, in
1935 you had already established connections with the Rights, as
you state, in the person of the accused Rykov. Is that right?
GRINKO: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: With whom did you establish connections
through Krestinsky?
GRINKO: With the fascist circles of a state hostile to the Soviet Union.
VYSH INSKY: With representatives of these circles? With representatives of fascist circles?
GRINKO: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: When was that?
GRINKO: At the end of 1935 and the beginning of 1936.
VYSHINSKY: But had you personally no connections with any
fascist circles before 1935?
GR INKO: I had, from the end of 1932.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you have to resort to Krestinsky's
assistance in 1935?
GRINKO: Because the Trotskyites had their line of connections
in respect to the Ukraine. I considered that the official relations of this Ukrainian national-fascist organization should be
established officially, through Krestinsky, so as to make sure that
the same thing was being discussed, so as to avoid negotiations on
one thing in one place and on another thing in another place.
VYSHINSKY: There was a certain amount of reinsurance here?•
GRINKO: Yes, I really wanted to verify these connections
with those I had personally.
VYSHINSKY: And you exposed Krestinsky?
GRINKO: No, I did not expose, I got confirmation. I had nothing exposing him.
VYSHINSKY: And not at this Court?
GRINKO: That is another matter.
VYSHINSKY: Have you exposed Krestinsky now?
GRINKO: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Krestinsky, did you hear this part of
the evidence?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I heard it. But I did not connect him with
any fascists, I introduced him to business people.
VYSHINSKY: You did not connect, you "introduced"?
KRESTINSKY: Not to fascists.

72

VYSHINSKY: Then we need no names at the in camera session.
Either you connected him or you did not connect him.
KRESTINSKY: I cannot tell you now.
VYSHINSKY: Of course, you deny it?
KRESTINSKY: I deny that I talked with fascists for Trotskyite purposes.
VYSHINSKY: You deny, but (to Grinko) you affirm. Perhaps,
accused Grinko, you are confusing this with something else? PerImps he introduced you to a pleasant gentleman, although a foreign
gentleman, and you ...
GRINKO: I think joking is out of place here.
VYSHINSKY: But that is how it works out.
GRINKO: I am surprised at what Krestinsky says.
VYSHINSKY: Can you, accused Grinko, say where the negotiations with Krestinsky took place?
GRINKO: I can say that they took place in my former office
in the People's Commissariat of Finance.
VYSHINSKY (to Krestinsky): Did you visit Grinko in his office?
KRESTINSKY: I visited him quite often at different conferences.
VYSHINSKY: On financial affairs or the affairs of the People's
Commissariat of Foreign Affairs?
KRESTINSKY: I visited him because I was appointed to some
committee together with Grinko, a committee which dealt with
i he affairs of the People's Commissariat of Finance and of the
People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs.
VYSHINSKY: That was natural in your position.
GRINKO: I told Krestinsky that we held such-and-such a
position, that Pyatakov had sent me, that I requested that this
position be communicated and that I receive a reply. Krestinsky informed me that he had communicated this position and that this
position had been accepted. And later on I myself, in the Grand
Theatre, spoke with the person with whom Krestinsky had communicated.
VYSHINSKY: Will you be able to mention the names of these
persons at the in camera session?
GR INKO: Of course.
VYSH INSKY: How do you explain the fact that Krestinsky
is denying everything?
GRINKO: I cannot explain it.
VYSHINSKY: Besides this case, did you have any other talks
with Krestinsky on questions concerning anti-Soviet activities?
GRINKO: There was the talk I mentioned at the morning
session about utilizing valuta. I did not need much mediation as
I had my own direct connections.
73

VYSH INSKY (to Rykov): Do you corroborate the part of
the evidence in which Grinko refers to you?
RYKOV: Yes, I had two meetings with him. One at the end of
1935 and the other at the beginning of 1936.
VYSHINSKY: What was the nature of these meetings?
RYKOV: They were meetings of members of an illegal organization who were fighting the Party and the Soviet government.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have occasion to speak to Grinko about
Kresti nsky?
RYKOV: Not about Krestinsky. There was no need for me to
speak about him because I knew without Grinko's telling me that
Krestinsky was a Trotskyite. Similarly, Krestinsky knew that
I was a member of the illegal organization.
VYSHINSKY: It follows then that Krestinsky is not telling
the truth here and is trying to wriggle out of his connection with
the Trotskyites?
RYKOV: Not only is he not telling the truth, but Ile wants
to confuse the truth that has come out here.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Krestinsky, did you l!car this?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I heard it.
VYSHINSKY: Do you corroborate it?
KRESTINSKY: I do not corroborate that I am not telling
the truth, and do not corroborate that I want to confuse the truth.
VYSHINSKY: I have a question to put to Krestinsky.
But you knew that Rykov was engaged in an underground
struggle?
KRESTINSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: You did not know?
KRESTINSKY: That is, I knew about it from the statements
that were made at the Plenum of the Central Committee.
VYSHINSKY: Oh, only in that way?
KRESTINSKY: Only in that way.
VYSHINSKY: And what would you say, accused Rykov?
How could he have learnt about the position you adhered to at
that time?
RYKOV: In the first place, if at a Plenum of the Central Committee a statement is made about the illegal activities of a member
of the Central Committee, that member of the Central Committee
ceases to be a member of the Central Committee.
We had conversations on this subject, sufficiently frank conversations to know exactly who was speaking to whom. I think
this was in 1932-33; -I do not remember the exact date.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, do you corroborate that you
knew that Krestinsky was a Trotskyite an.ct a member of the bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites?
RYKOV: That is, at that period such a complete bloc did not
74

exist, but that he was a member of the Trotskyite organization
I knew.
VYSHINSKY: And he had conversations with you?
RYKOV: He conversed with me as a member of the illegal
organization in the Party.
VYSHINSKY: You discussed matters of an illegal nature?
RYKOV: We discussed matters of an illegal nature.
VYSHINSKY: You assert that Krestinsky knew about your
affairs in the illegal organization in the Party, but Krestinsky
denies it; it follows then that Rykov is now not telling the truth
and that you, accused Krestinsky, are telling the truth?
KRESTINSKY: I am telling the truth.
VYSHINSKY: And since when have you been telling the truth?
KRESTINSKY: On this matter?
VYSHINSKY: Yes.
KRESTINSKY: Today I am telling the truth.
THE PRESIDENT: Since 12 o'clock?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, in this Court.
VYSHINSKY: Very well, so it was with Rykov and Krestinsky.
Proceed now, accused Grinko, and tell us please whether you
knew that some of the others now in the dock were at that time
members of your underground organization. Enumerate them.
GRINKO: I knew that Bukharin belonged to it.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you corroborate this?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I do. I emphasize this because once I had
a conversation with Grinko himself.
GRINKO: Yes, that is so.
VYSHINSKY: So Grinko is telling the truth?
.
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You see, I am verifying this because Krestinsky
says that the accused Grinko is wrong.
BUKHARIN: I added the correction simply in order to make
things clear, because it is not that he might have known about
my underground work from Rykov, but that I met Grinko .personally.
GRINKO: That was later.
Then I learnt from Gamarnik about Rosengoltz 's membership,
and about his direct connections.
:VYSHINSKY: Accused Rosengoltz, do you corroborate this?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Proceed.
GRINKO: I knew about Zelensky's membership, and :about
his direct connections.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Zelensky, is the accused Grinko telling
the truth?
ZELENSKY; The truth.
75

GRINKO: From Rykov I learnt that Yagoda belonged io
this organization, but I had no direct _connections wi!h Yagoda.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Pernut me to question Rykov.
Accused Rykov, did you tell Grinko about this?
RYKOV: I do not remember exactly, but I cannot exclude such
a fact.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you told him about Yagoda 's membership?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to question Yagoda.
Accused Yagoda, do you corroborate this?
YAGODA: Yes, as regards myself it is true, but that Grinko
was a member I did not know.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to question Krestinsky.
Acc·used Krestinsky, all the accused say that in regard to themselves the truth is being told; you say that it did not happen. Are
you teiling the truth?
KRESTINSKY: I am telling the truth.
VYSHINSKY: Today?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Grinko, continue your evidence.
GRINKO: Gradually extending my connections with the
Right and Trotskyite centre, and having ascertained who belonged
to it, I at the beginning of 1934 formed an opinion of what the
"Right and Trotskyite centre" was.
From a number of conversations and connections, and the
tasks I received from Rykov, Bukharin, Gamarnik, Rosengoltz,
Yakovlev, Antipov, Rudzutak, Yagoda, Vareikis and a number
of other persons, it became clear to me that at that time the "Right
and Trotskyite centre" based itself mainly on the military aid
of aggressors. This was the common position of the Trotskyites,
the Rights and the nationalist organizations, in particular of the
Ukrainian nationalist organization. This meant undermining the
power of defence of the Soviet Union, undermining activities in
the army and in the defence industry, opening the front in the
event of war and provoking this war; it meant extending connections with aggressive anti-Soviet elements abroad; it meant consenting to the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R. and compensating
the aggressors at the expem:e of the border territories of the U .S.S.R.
In addition to this, the Right and Trotskyite centre had a plan
to seize the Kremlin.
VYSHINSKY: What year was that?
GRINKO: This was discussed throughout the period of 193536. It was being discussed all the time. Perhaps even earlier.
Terrorist inclinations, and not only terrorist inclinations but

76

terrorist activities undoubtedly existed in the Right and Trot·
skyite centre.
I know of two attempts to prepare terrorist acts which are not
mentioned in the indictment, and which I must tell the Court.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us about the terrorist activities.
GRINKO: At that period terrorist activities were one of the
main weapons in the common arsenal of struggle against the Soviet power.
VYSHINSKY: From whom did you learn this?
GRINKO: From Rykov, Yakovlev, Gamarnik and Pyatakov.
VYSH INS KY: And from the accused in the present case?
GRINKO: From Rykov I learnt that it was a terrorist organi·
zation; when Rykov informed me of the character of this organization he said that terrorism was included in the program.
VYSHINSKY (to Rykov): Accused Rykov, do you corrohorate
Grinko 's evidence':'
RYKOV: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Where did this terrorist line emanate from?
GRINKO: From Trotsky. I learnt this from Gamarnik.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us the concrete facts about preparations
of terrorist acts that you personally know of.
GRINKO: I want to tell of two terrorist acts that were prepared
but not carried out. These occurred in the last period, approximately in the first half of 1937, which is connected wtth the beginning of the crushing of the conspiratorial organizations. After
the trial of Pyatakov and the others, and particularly after the
February-March Plenum of the Central Committee of the
C.P.S.U. (Bolsheviks) in 1937, there was great consternation in
the Right and Trotskyite centre. I was told about this at the time
by Gamarnik, and he said that he had conferred with Rykov and
Bukharin about this. It was then said that something extraordinary had to be done to shuffle the cards and to check the offensive
that the Party and the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs
were then waging agarnst the conspirators. After the February
Plenum of the Central Committee a campaign was raised in the
conspirators' circles against Yezhov, in whom the determination
and unity of purpose of the Party to crush the conspirators was
concentrated.In the Right and Trotskyite centre this campaign was
waged along two lines: on the one hand, an attempt was made
to discredit Yezhov and the work he was doing in the Party, to
slander him. Also the question was bluntly raised of removing
Yezhov as the man who was most dangerous to the conspirators.
VYSHINSKY: What does "removing" mean?
GRIN KO: To remove means to kill.
VYSHINSKY: That is what you should have said.

77

GRINKO: I said "reinove'i because it had a double meaning!
on the one hand to discredit Yezhov in the Party, to undermine
his prestige, and on the other hand, to remove him physically.
VYSHINSKY: That I understand, but I was also interested
to know what the word "remove'~ meant in the criminal sense.
GRINKO: To remove means to kill.
VYSHINSKY: And is that how you talked?
GRINKO: I had learnt from Gamarnik that Yakir and Gamarnik had instructed the Trotskyite Ozeryansky, who was then working in the People's Commissariat of Finance, to prepare a terrorist
act against Yezhov.
VYSHINSKY: Ozeryansky was your immediate subordinate?
GRINKO: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What was his position?
GRINKO: He was the Chief of the Department of Savings Banks.
VYSHINSKY: Did he belong to your organization?
GRINKO: Yes, he did. I learnt that from Gamarnik, but I had
no direct connections with him in preparing the terrorist act.
VYSHINSKY: But in other counter-revolutionary matters?
GRINKO: I had connections with him in undermining activities in the People's Commissariat of Finance.
VYSHINSKY: Ozeryansky is a suitable man for this sort of
crime, is he not?
GRINKO: He is a fighter, a former anarchist ....
VYSHrNSKY: And a cut-throat?
GRINKO: He is capable of such things.
The second fact that I know, and which occurred in the same
period, is the preparation by Bergavinov, from the Head Office
of the Northern Sea Route, of a terrorist act against Stalin. This
I also learnt from Gamarnik. Antipov and Yakovlev knew about
this, and I heard it from Bergavinov himself, who told me that
he had accepted Gamarnik's commission and that he was trying
to carry it out.
One of the tasks set me by the Right and Trotskyite centre
was to organize undermining activities in the People's Commissariat of Finance. I gave detailed testimony on this during the preliminary investigation. Here I will deal only with the main lines
and moments of these undermining activities.
This task of the Right and Trotskyite centre was conveyed
to me by Rykov, and in doing so he emphasized that the leadership of the centre, he and Bukharin, attached great importance
to the development of undermining activities in the People's
Commissariat of Finance in view of the special importance and
political significance of money. At the same time he gave me
Bukharin's formula: strike at the Soviet government with the
Soviet ruble. This was conveyed to me by Rykov, and I also dis-

78

cussed it with Bukharin. lt must be said that the Right and 'Trotskyite centre attached so much importance to this task that Rykov
came to see me about it at the People's Commissariat of Finance
and we jointly drew up a program of measures for it.
Wrecking activities were to be carried on in connection with
those financial measures that are connected with the broad masses
of the population: taxes, savings banks, loans, etc. The program
was drawn up by Rykov and myself. The wrecking activities
were developed through my Assistant Commissar, Levin, through
Ozeryansky, through Chetverikov and several others.
For example, in regard to taxes. The distortions which found
most striking expression in the Lepe! case in Byelorussia were
part of these undermining measures. And the reason why the
exposure of the Lepe! case was not turned sharply against the
People's Commissariat of Finance at that time was that Yakovlev
went there to expose this case, and he warded off the blow from
the People's Commissariat of Finance.
In regard to savings banks, two measures were adopted: the
reduction in the number of savings banks; and the other in connection with borrowing on state loan bonds. The reduced number
of savings banks was not prepared for this wide measure, and as
this operation was connected with a service affecting tens of millions of people, it caused irritation among broad masses of the
population.
Considerable undermining work was carried out in the sphere
of the state budget. This work was directed towards undermining
budget finance discipline, loosening financial control and thereby
creating possibilities for utilizing state funds at the centre and in
the periphery, for the purposes of the conspiracy. All this work on
the instructions given me by the Right and Trotskyite centre
I carried out through a number of people working on the staff
of the People's Commissariat of Finance.
The undermining activities were not limited to this, however.
From the Right and Trotskyite centre I received instructions to
utilize the finances for the purpose of assisting undermining activities in a number of other branches of the national economy.
For example, the Right and Trotskyite centre drew up a rather
big program of undermining activities in capital construction.
Pyatakov, I think Bukharin, and I took part in drawing up this
program. The object of this program was to slow down capital
construction, to reduce the scale of capital construction and fully
to apply Bukharin's "bottleneck" theory in capital construction,
the more so that capital construction is important not only as
a most important branch of the national economy but also is of
enormous defence importance.
79

t also participated in underminir1g activities i.n the sphere of
agriculture by carrying out wrecking financial measures. Undermining activities in the sphere of agriculture were regarded by
the Right and Trotskyite centre as a very important task.
Stalin had urged collectivization as the decisive means of
overcoming the backwardness of agriculture. On the basis of the
successes achieved in collectivization the task was set of achieving
a harvest of 7-8 billion poods per annum. The Right and Trotskyite centre drew up a plan of undermining measures which, had
they been successful, would at all events have delayed, if not
prevented, the obtaining of harvests amounting to 7-8 billion
poods. In particular, Rykov put the question in the following
way: things must be so arranged that the collective farmer shall
receive as little as possible for his workday. From the point of
view of the po litica I preparations for the anti-Soviet struggle,
this was of enormous significance, the more so that the question
of grain reserves is of enormous defence significance, which was
also taken into consideration by the Right and Trotskyite centre
when the program was drawn up.
In. carrying out the wrecking measures and wrecking instructions in the financing of agriculture, no little assistance was rendered by Rudzutak, who was in charge of financial affairs in the
Council of People's Commissars, and by Yakovlev.
I think I have said what is fundamental and most important
about general political matters. Thus, I would like to say that
here, before the Supreme Court of the Soviet Union, I must answer
and do answer for a long chain of heinous crimes against the Soviet
power, and for a most acute struggle cgainst the Soviet power,
firstly as one of the participants in the nationalist counter-revolutionary struggle in the Ukraine, which, after passing through
a number of stages, degenerated into a national-fascist organization, of which I was one of the leaders, and as one of the members
of the bloc of Righis and Trotskyites, who did not confine himself
only to working in the national-fascist organization in the Ukraine
hut, having started with connections with the bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites, was drawn by the latter into wider work in conspiratorial Right and Trotskyite activities; at the same time I answer
for treason to the country and for those direct connections with
influential circles in certain fascist states which were established
for the purpose of fulfilling the tasks of the bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites, of overthrowing the Soviet power and of severing
from the U.S.S.R. a number of regions.
I piead guilty wholly and entirely, and I need not add that
I do not in the least intend in my testimony to minimize my guilt.
THE PRESIDENT: Has anyone else any questions to put to
the accused Grinko?
80

VYSHINSKY: I would like to clear up several questions.
Firstly, do you know, accused Grinko, about the wrecking
activities of the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites in the sphere of
supplying the population with articles of prime necessitybread, etc.?
·
GRINKO: Along with wrecking activities in the sphere
of capital construction and agriculture, the bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites carried on quite extensive undermining activities
in the sphere of trade turnover. In this sphere I had direct connections with Zelensky.
·
VYSHINSKY: Did you establish these connections directly
with Zelensky on your own initiative, on his initiative, or on the
instructions of other persons?
·
OR INKO: I find it hard to say, I cannot say definitely, but
[ think the connections were established without intermediaries,
it was on my own initiative. There was an intervening link here.
Gamatnik put me in touch with Zelensky's assistant, Mayorov,
who connected me with him. But most likely I established connections
with him myself. I will recall it later on and tell you exactly.
- VYSHINSKY: What crimes were committed in this·sphere?
OR INKO: In the sphere of trade turnover · Zelensky and
ether wreckers in this sphere,. for example · Bolotin in the
People's Commissariat of Internal Trade, carri'ed on undermining activities, created a shortage of goods, goods difficulties in
the country. This applies to provisions as well as to articles of
prime necessity. For example, the proper territorial distribution
of goods in conformity with the size of the harvest, with the purchasing capacity of the population, the· prosperity of the population in the different regions is of enormous importance .. Zelensky,
on the instructions of the bloc of Rights and· Trotskyites, sent
huge quantities of goods to the districts where there was a poor
harvest and smaller quantities of goods to the dtstricts where
there were good harvests, and this caused goods to remain on the
shelves in some districts and a shortage of goods in others.
VYSHINSKY: How do you know that Zelensky did these
things?
ORINKO: I know it from Zelensky himself; and with Rykov
too we spoke of such measures as having been and being carried
out expediently-from the point of view of the conspiratorial
organization, of course.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you personally knew it from Zelensky
·
as well as from. . •
GRINKO: As well as from Rykov and Bolotin.
VYSHINSKY: So you assert this not groundlessly but you.
base it on hard facts.
·
GRINKO: Of course.
6

81

VYSH INS KY: Zelensky, did you hear this part of Grinko 's
evidence? What do you think about it?
ZELENSKY: Grinko is telling the truth.
VYSH INS KY: Accused Rykov, what do you say?
RYKOV: I must deny part of it. If it is about Zelensky,
I did not say it.
VYSHINSKY: Not ahout Zelensky, but about the fact, about
wrecking activities in trade turnover.
RYKOV: I did not speak to him about this in such detail.
We spoke about wrecking in gern:ral; as for my drawing up a
definite pfa n of wrecking in the People's Commissariat of Finance,
that is not the case.
VYSH INSKY: What do you remember?
RYKOV: I remember that there was talk about overthrowing
the Soviet government. I remember that just at that time the
trial of wre(.kers was taking place in Siberia. At this trial wreckers
were discovered, were caught. I said to Grinko that it was more
difficult to catch wreckers in the sphere of finance.
VYSH INSKY: That was a theoretical conversation?
RYKOV: No, we talked like two men who recognized wrecking as one of the methods of counter-revolutionary activity.
VYSH INSKY: That is, you talked as two members of a wreckers' organization?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSH INS KY: About wrecking which ought to be done in
such-and-such a manner.
RYKOV: Yes, yes, there is no doubt about that.
VYSHINSKY: And you remember that?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: But you do not remember the details of your
conversation?
RYKOV: About drawing up a plan or program of wrecking
inthe People's Commissariat of Finance-that I do not remember.
VYSHJNSKY: That in principle it was necessary to do wrecking, to affect the most acute problems?
•
RYKOV: No, I do not remember this.
VYSHINSKY: And you, Grinko, do you remember?
GRINKO: I will remind him. Rykov, you came to me in the
Pe(}ple's Commissariat of Finance on the question of extending
the network of village post offices (you were then People's Commissar of Post and Telegraph). After we had finished the, so to
speak, legal part, you stayed on and we had a general political
talk-about Ukrainian affain, and about the connections between the Ukrainian underground organizations and the Right
and Trntskyite centre. You then said that wrecking in the sphere
of finance was lagging.

82

VYSHINSKY: You say that the accused Rykov spoke
about the People's Commissariat of Finance lagging, but in
what?
GRINKO: In wrecking activities.
VYSH INSKY: Rykov said that you were wrecking badly?
GR INKO: It was then that we agreed on the main lines along
which the work was to be developed.
VYSH INS KY: Accused Rykov, do you corroborate this convemition with Grinko about wrecking?
RYKOV: I don't accept that. I deny it, but not because I
want to minimize my guilt. I have done much worse things than
this.
VYSHINSKY: But do you remember the conversation about
wrecking?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSH INSKY: And about it being difficult to catch people
in this sphere. But you preferred to do wrecking where it was
difficult to catch people, and not where it was easy to catch them?
RYKOV: A wrecker cannot always take this into consideration.
VYSHINSKY: Do you plead guilty to the charge of wrecking?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: At all events you discussed wrecking with
Grinko in respect to possible converging wrecking measures, that
is to say, criminal deeds.
RYKOV: In respect to this measure being necessary and it
being one of the necessary measures in the fight against the Soviet power.
VYSH INS KY: Hence, Grinko had a right to say that Rykov
sufficiently instructed him as to the direction of \vTecking.
RYKOV: Here we could not instruct each other because
there was no disagreement between us.
VYSHINSKY: But in the sphere of the People's Commissariat
of Finance, did Grinko need your instruction as a wrecker, or
did he know what to do himself?
RYKOV: I will speak about this in my testimony. We had
this talk at the beginning of 1936, but he enumerated a number
of things which, if they had ta}5,,:. place, would have taken place
much earlier. One could judge of the results by the budget, but the results of the budget were known after my arrest, that is, the 1937
budget.
VYSHINSKY: You do not accept the formula that was mentioned here-strike at the Soviet government with the Soviet
ruble?
RYKOV: I did not say that.
VYSHINSKY: But that was the task that was set?
6*

83

RYKOV: I remember what he said about the Clemenceau
thesis.
VYSHINSKY: Did Clemenceau also want to strike anybody
with the Soviet ruble?
RYKOV: At one time the Clemenceau thesis was known as
the formulation of the desire for a change of government.
VYSHINSKY: That is understandable in regard to the Clemenceau thesis; but what relation has it to wrecking work in
the sphere of the People's Commissariat of Finance?
RYKOV: It has no direct relation to wrecking work. It is
one of the violent forms.
VYSHINSKY: Grinko spoke here about the military group
of traitors-Tukhachevsky and others, who some ti me ago were
convicted by the Supreme Court. Do you corroborate the part of
this evidence that concerns you?
RYKOV: I knew about Tukhachevsky's military group.
VYSHINSKY: What did you know?
RYKOV: This military group was organized independently
of the bloc, independently of shades-Trotskyite or Bukharinite.
The military group set itself the object of violently removing
the government of the Union and, in particular, it took part in
the preparations for a Kremlin coup.
VYSHINSKY: You were aware of that?.
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: When did you learn of it?
RYKOV: I learnt of it from Tomsky in 1934.
VYSHINSKY: In 1934?
RYKOV: Probably.
VYSHINSKY: Does this part of Grinko 's evidence correspond
with the truth?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Grinko, in regard to the harvest,
wllatconversationsdidyou have with Rykov? Make it more precise.
GRINKO: The talk I had with Rykov was to the effect that
the "Right and Trotskyite centre" attached enormous importance
to the development of undermining measures in the sphere of
agriculture, which is emphasized by Rykov himself, that it was
Bukharin'spointof view, and followed from the following postulate:
collectivization should result in the removal of the contradiction
between the level of industrial development of the country and
the level of development of agriculture, a removal which is absolutely necessary for the further rapid rate of Socialist construction.
On the other hand, there was the enormous program of 7-8 bi Ilion poods of grain, which would solve the question of the prosperity of the rural districts and of removing the differences
between town and country. This program was making consider84

able progress, and this was of enormous importance from the point
of ~iew of the defence of the Soviet Union in respect to creating
grain reserves.
Rykov said that he knew about the program of the "Right
and Trotskyite centre," and that undermining work must be developed to the fu II.
VYSH!NSKY: What interests me is the question, why Rykov
found it necessary to talk to you on this question?
GR INKO: I told Rykov that when I had established the
connections of the Ukrainian organizations we would inevitably
have to take up all the principal political questions. We had an
exchange of opinion which was informative. My wrecking work
in the People's Commissariat of Finance was the next supplement to this general political connection. On the other hand,
I at one time had worked in the People's Commissariat of Agriculture, had been Assistant People's Commissar, and I had personal
·connections. For agriculture, for the machine and tractor stations, for the collective farms, etc., the whole mechanism of finance is of enormous importance, and it was in this connection.
that Rykov spoke to me, related the undermining measures in
agriculture and advised me what to do in this respect.
VYSH INSKY: Accused Grinko, did you have occasion to
speak to Bukharin?
GRINKO: I had a short talk with Bukharin in the Kremlin
about the principle basis of undermining measures in the sphere
of finance, a talk about the hostility of the bloc of Rights and'
Trotskyites towards the Franco-Soviet Treaty.
VYSHINSKY: Did not Bukharin explain to you why he was
dissatisfied with the Franco-Soviet Treaty?
GR INKO: I wi II speak about that later. Then, as we were
walking in the corridor we talked generally about whether wrecking was permissible as a method of political struggle, because it
caused enormous economic loss; but he said that in so far as politics predominated in this case wrecking was permissible; on the
other hand, the establishment of wider economic connections
with the capitalist world would create possibilities for making
good the loss caused by wrecking.
As for the Franco-Soviet Treaty, in the Right and Trotskyite
centre (I had a talk with Rykov and with Bukharin about this)
there was fairly widespread hostility to the Franco-Soviet Ireaty
because the Franco-Soviet Treaty was one of the stages m the.
peace policy of the Soviet power which ren;oved or postpone~ the
clash with the aggressor, the clash on which the bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites had put their stake; the annulment of the FrancoSoviet Treaty for the purpose of unleashing opportunities for the
85

aggressor was part of the program of the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us in greater detail about the defeatist
line of the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites.
GRINKO: The first talks I had with a number of the lead·
ing members of the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites showed
me that the principal political stake-if we are to speak concretely
and not in general-was put on the defeat of the Soviet Union in
a war with an aggressor, on compensating the aggressor at the
expense of the border territories of the Soviet Union, and on
the overthrow of the Soviet government in the course of this.
In addition, as I have a !ready Stated, I can reca II, for example,
that when I told Rykov some of the details connected with the
sale of the Chinese Eastern Railway . . .
VYSHINSKY: Don't forget that we shall have an in camera
session of the Court.
GRINKO: I am not forgetting. We had an exchange of remarks
as a result of which it was clear that this was the elimination
of one of the causes of the possible war with Japan which had entered into the plans of the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites orientated themselves towards war.
GRINKO: Yes, towards war, towards the military defeat of the
Soviet Union, and the assistance of the aggressor in seizing power.
VYSHINSKY: Orientation towards military defeat and the
assistance of the aggressor in seizing power.
GRINKO: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Apart from Rykov, did you work out the plans
for these crimes with anyone else?
GRINKO: From among those participating in the present trial?
VYSHINSKY: Yes. From among those now i·n the dock.
GRINKO: From among the accused in the present C(lSe-I do not
remember.
· · ·VYSH INSKY: And so you discussed this with Rykov?·-·
GRINKO: Yes, with Rykov, and the Franco-Soviet Treaty
with Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: And Rosengoltz?
GRINKO: It was Gamarnik who put me in touch with Rosengoltz. This fact alone shows that this is connected with some of
the military Trotskyite plans; but with Rosengoltz I discussed
mainly the measures, the undermining activities, which he was
carrying out in the sphere of foreign trade.
This is the economic aspect of the same defeatist position, in
so far as Rosengoltz was carrying out measures for the purpose of
helping the aggressor at the expense of the Soviet Union.

86

VYSH INS KY: In short, in Rosengoltz's criminal activities there
were the same defeatist motives as in your activities?
GR INKO: They lay at the base of everything.
,VY~HINSKY: So we can say that it is not only Rykov and
BuKhann, but also Rosengoltz. I have one more question. Did you
know about the Tukhachevsky plot, and if so, from whom?
GRINKO: From Oamarnik.
VYSH!NSKY: And who of the participants in this trial, of
the accused in the dock, besides Rykov, knew about this plot?
GRlNKO: R)sengoltz knew.
VYSH lNSKY: And who else?
GRlNKO: From what Rykov said, Bukharin knew.
VYSH !NSKY: And who else?
GRlNKO: No one else. I did not have connections with them
all. I think Yagoda kn~w . . . .
VYSHINSKY: You think, or did anybody te!l you? Why do
you think with such insight?
GR INKO: Because of the talks about Yagoda which I had with
Rykov.
VYSHINSKY: Naturally, you are speaking very cautiously in
order not to say too much.
GR INKO: Generally, Rykov spoke about Yagoda mostly in
hints.
VYSHINSKY: Thus the people who wera informed about the
Tukhachevsky plot and about the connection between the bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites with Tukhachevsky's conspiratorial
group were, besides yourself, Rykov, RJsengoltz, Bukharin, and,
you take it, Yagoda?
GRINKO: Yes, and a number of other people who are not now
in the dock.
VYSHINSKY: I am referring to the people who are participants
in the present trial.
I have no more questions.
GRIN KO: I would like to say two words in conclusion.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
GR INKO: I could and should qualify the testimony I gave
at the preliminary investigation, on tha one hand, as an exposure
of myself, because. this testimony was given after my arrest; but
at the same time, in the process of giving this testimony, in the
process of all that . l felt in the course of the preliminary investigation, this testimony was also my repentance. I would
like to emphasize in concluding my evidence that I answer here
as one who is exposed, but at the same time I answer as a traitor
to his country who has repented of his crimes.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*

•
87

•

. COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT (to Vyshinsky): Have you any more questions
to put to the accused Grinko?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the defence any questions?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: Have the accused any questions?
THE ACCUSED: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Chernov, do you corroborate the
testimony you gave during examination in the course of the preliminary investigation?
CHERNOV: I corroborate it wholly and entirely.
THE PRESIDENT. (to Vyshinsky): Do you desire to put any
questions?
VYSHI.NSKY: .Accused Chernov, briefly tell the Court your
biography.
CHERNOV: I was born in 1891. For two years I studied at
the Ecclesiastical Seminary. I entered the Moscow University, where·
I studied for about two years. Once I was arrested for revolutionary
activities, but I was not imprisoned. In 1916 I joined the Menshe-:
vik Party and remained a Menshevik until January 1920, when
I joined the Communist Party (Bolsheviks).
VYSHINSKY: That was formally?
CHERNOV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: But actually?
CHERNOV: After joining the Communist Party (Bolsheviks)
in January 1920, I up to 1927 honestly carried out all the duties
the Party imposed upon me.
VYSHINSKY: Up to 1927?
CHERNOV: Yes. But I must frankly confess that I undoubtedly
preserved my old Menshevik nature, and as soon as the Party
passed from the restricting method to the method of an offensive
against the kulak elements in the rural districts, this Menshevik
nature immediately asserted itself.
VYSHINSKY: How did this find expression, in what way
did the Menshevik nature assert itse If?
CHERNOV: In the autumn of 1927 definite doubts began to.
arise in my mind about the correctness of the Party's general
line.
VYSHINSKY: What did it lead to?
CHERNOV: I was at that time People's Commissar of Trade·
of the Ukraine and was in charge of grain collections. And grain
was precisely the whetstone that serve4 most to sharpen the re-

88

sistance and struggle of the kulaks against the Soviet power. That
autumn Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov came to the Ukraine
and put the question of grain collections to the Central Committee
of the Ukraine, and to us who were working on grain collections,
in an entirely new way. Before that the method on which grain
collections were based was free purchase and sale. This suited my
Menshevik nature. But now we were told to adopt extraordinary
measures against the rich kulak upper stratum of the rural population. This was the beginning of the decisive offensive against the
kulaks. I considered this wrong, and that it would lead to the
ruin of agriculture and to a reduction in the marketable surplus
of agricultural produce. And that is when my doubts began.
·
VYSHINSKY: And I am asking you-what did your doubts
lead to?
CHERNOV: These doubts were fortified in 1928. In 1928 there
was a bad harvest in the Ukraine, and I did not attribute this
bad harvest to weather conditions, which were the real causethere had been a bad winter and a bad spring that year in the
Ukraine, which had ruined the crop-but considered that this bad
harvest was an organic, and not an accidental phenomenon, caused
by the adoption of extraordinary measures in the grain collections, inasmuch as these extraordinary measures, in my opinion,
had killed in the peasants, including the middle peasants, all interest in the development of their farms, in the care of the crops,
in the better cultivation of the soil, and so on. I did not keep these
doubts, which had already become fortified in 1928, to myself,
but expressed them to the people I worked with, and sought supporters of my views among them.
VYSHINSKY: And did you find them?
CHERNOV: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Who were they?
CHERNOV: Goldin-he was chairman of the Ukrainian Grain
Department; then there was Vasi liev, who worked in the Ukrainian
Agricultural Co-operative Society, and a number of people with
whom I then worked in the sphere of grain co 1lections in the Ukraine.
And, in addition, I found that similar views were held by people
who were not directly connected with me in the sphere of grain collections, but who often conversed with me as the man that headed
the grain-collection work and knew the situation in the countryside, and who also expressed their dissatisfaction with the rural
policy of the Central Committee. Among them were Zatonsky,
Poraiko, Grinko and a number of other persons, all of whom
I cannot now recall.
VYSH INS KY: What year was that?
CHERNOV: That was in 1928.
89

VYSHINSKY: Were you a member of the illegal organization
of the Rights in 1928?

CHERNOV: I consider that inasmuch as I expressed my views
to those who held like opinions and who expressed dissatisfaction
with the policy of the Party, that was already the beginning of the
attempt to create such an organization in the Ukraine; but I consider that I formally joined the organization of the Rights after
my first meeting with Rykov.
VYSH INSKY: You were drawn into this organization by Rykov?
CHERNOV: Yes, but I was already prepared for it.
VYSHINSKY: You found each other, in fact?
CHERNOV: Yes, you can put it that way. I met Rykov in the
autumn of 1928.
At the request of Mikoyan, People's Commissar of Trade of
the U.S.S.R., I was to go to Mukhalatka, to the sanatorium
in the Crimea wht>re Mikoyan was spending his vacation, to
report on my work as People's Commissar of Trade of the Ukraine.
Alexei lvanovich Rykov was there at the same time, as I had
learnt, incidentally. Among those who shared my views,
the idea was discussed that it would be a good thing if one of
us were to see Rykov and to discuss with him the questions
we had been talking about in the Ukraine, which I have
just mentioned. I decided to take advantage of Rykov's stay in
Mukhalatka, and we met. At our meeting I informed Rykov of the
state of affairs in the Ukrainian villages, of the bad harvest in
the Ukraine, and of the impoverishment which was to be observed
in the Ukrainian villages. Rykov was particularly interested in the distortions of policy which were taking place, which had
occurred in some instances in the grain-collection work, and I told
him of these instances. Then, I recall, after I had given my information and had told of the individual instances of distortion,
Rykov said: "You think that these are individual cases of
stupidity on the part of the grain-collection apparatus? You are
mistaken. It is a result of the policy of the Central Committee of
the Party, which is leading to the ruin of the countryside and of
agriculture."
VYSHlNSKY: Well, and how did you react?
CHERNOV: I reacted to this by greater boldness in expressing to him the doubts of which [ have just told the Court. Rykov
explained to me the views of the Rights on this question: that is,
not only on this question, but the views and program of the Rights,
which were opposed to collectivization and to the industrialization
-0f the country.
During this meeting I told Rykov that there were people who
shared my views in the Ukraine. Rykov replied that all these

90

people were known, that the majority of them were known
to him and could be of great assistance to the cause of the
Right organization. But, he said, you should not act on too broad
lines just now and thus divulge your forces. The time for broad
action has not yet arrived. You must know, he said, how the Central
Committee demolished the Trotskyites, and if we were to disclose
·our forces already it would react unfavourably on our Right organiza1.ion.
I thereupon said to Rykov that if I understood him rightly we
must create a secret underground organization. This he confirmed,
adding moreover that I, Chernov, was People's Commissar of Tra.de
of the Ukraine and occupied a very important post. My task, he
·said, was to conduct my work in such a way as to incense the
middle peasants by extending to them the repressive measures which
the government had laid down for the kulaks. I was to accentuate
the distortions of policy, to incense the middle peasants, to take
specia I account of the national feelings of the Ukrainian population and to explain everywhere that these distortions were a result
-0f the policy of Moscow; and in this way we would both create our
.cadres and at the same time rouse the peasants against the Soviet
government and the Central Committee. In conclusion, Rykov and
,J agreed that when I came to Moscow I should come and see him
.and maintain contact with him for the purpose of co-ordinating
the actions of the Right organization in the Ukraine.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, tell us, does this part of what
·Chernov says correspond with the facts?
RYKOV: I met Chernov and tried to convince him of the correctness of my counter-revolutionary activities at that time. I intended to make him my follower, but I found a ready-made
follower in Chernov.
VYSH INSKY: You did not have to try very hard?
RYKOV: On the contrary, I did not have to try at all.
I cannot relate things with the detail he does. All that he says
i.s essentially and fundamentally true, but as to the part in whi~h
>he said that I was in favour of distortions, it seems to me he 1s
wrong. In everything else he is right.
VYSHINSKY: Well, let us speak about everything else.
Did Chernov really come to see you in 1928, and did he really
:put before you, as one of the leaders of the Right trend-let us put
it that way-of that time, a number of questions of a politica~ nature,
and did you elucidate these questions from your standpoint, cal·culating on inducing him to join your group? Did you already
.at that time have a group of Rights acting on an underground
footing?
RYKOV: No, not on an underground footing.
VYSHINSKY: But the group had already been formed?
91

RYKOV: Yes. It could only be a question of creating such a
type of organizational kernel, semi-legal.
VYSHINSKY: And so there was a semi-legal group headed
by you. And by who else? Bukharin and Tomsky? Is that right?
RYKOV: Yes, there was such a group.
VYSHINSKY: And you decided to draw Chernov into this
group?
RYKOV: Yes, I found a supporter in Chernov. When I was in
Mukhalatka in 1928, I did not know what Chernov's position was
on this question, and I tried, so to speak, to convince him, to win
hi,m over. It was a surprise to me at the time to find a ready-made
supporter in Chernov.
VYSHINSKY: You found a ready-made partner. And did you
meet Chernov after that?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In what year?
RYKOV: Several months later, when he was about to go
abroad.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Chernov, is this correct?
CHERNOV: No, I met him several times. I confirm that I met
Rykov before leaving for abroad, but I would add that this was
not the only meeting and that there were several other meetings,
about which I can tell if the Court wishes.
VYSHINSKY: If it has any relation to the subject of the
accusation. Meanwhile, accused Rykov, you may sit down.
CHERNOV: I once more affirm-Alexei Ivanovich has forgotten
it apparently, but I remember it very well, and I remember how
it was expressed. I cannot vouch for every word, but only for
the contents and construction of Rykov's phrases: it was to the
effect that I must organize my work in such a way as to accentuate
the distortions of policy and thus incense the middle peasants,
and that in my work as a member of the Right organization I was
to take account of the nationalist sentiments of the Ukrainian
population. That I remember very well.
VYSHINSKY: We can go into that later. The question at
present is your conspiratorial connections with Rykov. Continue.
CHERNOV: The subsequent character of my activities was
somewhat modified by the fact that I had previously counted
on working in the Ukraine, but was then transferred to other work
in Moscow.
I now pass to the next episode. At the end of 1928 I was about
to go to Germany for a cure. Knowing that an old comrade of mine
in the Menshevik organization was living in Germany, I decided
to see him.
VYSHINSKY: Who was that?

92

CHERNOV: Kibrik, with whom I had corresponded until
1925, and who was living in Germany under another name.
Before leaving for Germany I decided to see Rykov in Moscow.
VYSH INS KY: Why did you go to Rykov?
CHERNOV: Because I had arranged with him that we were to
<Co-ordinate our actions as members of the Right organization,
and also to find out whether he had any commissions to give me
in Germany.
VYSHINSKY: Commissions in relation to . . . underground
work?
CHERNOV: I was not thinking of that.
VYSH INS KY: Commissions along what lines?
CHERNOV: Before my conversation with Rykov I did not
know what the commissions would be.
VYSHINSKY: You just thought to yourself: Iamgoingabroad,
what commissions wi II there be-legal or illegal?
CHERNOV: I was not thinking of that.
VYSH INS KY: Whether there would be commissions along
underground lines?
CHERNOV: In connection with the Right organization.
VYSH INSKY: In connection with the Right organization.
CHERNOV: I telephoned Rykov's secretary-Nesterov, I
think it was-and told him that I was going abroad and that
I wanted to speak to Rykov about foreign exchange matters, about
the rise in foreign exchange, expecting that Rykov would understand me and receive me. I telephoned his secretary and did indeed
get an appointment with Rykov.
During this meeting with Rykov I informed him about conditions in the Ukrainian countryside and how the grain collections were proceeding. I told him that I was leaving for Germany,
.and asked him if he had any commissions to give me. Knowing that
I was an old Menshevik, Rykov a,sked me whether I could not get
to see Dan while I was in Germany, establish connections with
him and transmit a message from the Right centre. I told Rykov
that I might be able to do this and that I thought that I might be
assisted in this by my comrade in Menshevik work. This was
Kibrik, of whom I have just spoken. Rykov then commissioned me
to get in touch with Dan and to convey to him a message from
the Right centre.
VYSHINSKY: What message?
CHERNOV: I forgot to say that Tomsky was present during
my conversation with Rykov. The message was as follows: through
the parties of the Second International to rouse the public opinion
-0f capitalist countries against the Soviet government; through the
leaders of the Second International to get the bourgeois governments to intensify the hostile attitude towards the Soviet
93

Union; to secure from the Second International and, through
its leaders, from bourgeois governments, a pledge of support in
the event of the seizure of power by the Ri~hts in the country. I told Rykov that it would not be enough to convey only
these messages to Dan. Dan would undoubtedly raise a number
of questions about the strength of the Right organization and
about what the Right organization would do after it came topower. To this Rykov replied: "You may assure Dan that we possess enough forces in the country to overthrow the existing
government and to seize the power." He particularly stressed
the point that we possessed these forces also among prominent
and responsible military men. The second thing he mentioned
was that I could declare to Dan that after the Rights came to
power they would establish a government that would take info
account the demands both of the Second International and of
the bourgeois governments, and would consent to an arrangement with the bourgeois governments both on economic questions
and, if necessary, on territorial questions. I distinctly remember
that Tomsky, who was present during this conversation, stated
that the anti-Soviet parties did not exist formally, but were actually working and striving for the overthrow of the Soviet power.
He said that we must not only utilize them but also give them a
share in the government of the state.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, did you see Chernov before
he left for Berlin?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you speak to Chernov in Tomsky's presence, or in private?
RYKOV: In Tomsky's presence.
VYSHINSKY: Did you commission Chernov to get in touch
with Dan in Berlin?
RYKOV: Yes.
.
VYSH INSKY: With what purpose?
RYKOV: As far as I can recall there were two: firstly, to get
the foreign press to write about the situation in the countryside,
the discontent of the peasants ....
VYSH INSKY: Which press?
RYKOV: The foreign press.
VYSHINSKY: Which exactly?
RYKOV: I did not enumerate parties or newspapers: I had
both the Socialist and bourgeois press in mind.
VYSHINSKY: And the Menshevik press?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps the "Sotsialistichesky Vestnik" especially.
RYKOV: It, in particular.
94

VYSHINSKY: By the way, did you generally during this
period contribute to the "Sotsialistichesky Vestnik," directly
or through somebody else?
RYKOV: I had connections with the "Sotsialistichesky Vestnik" through Nikolayevsky.
• VYSHINSKY: You had connections with the "Sotsialistichesky Vestnik." That is to say, you were a contributor to the
"Sotsialistichesky Vestnik."
RYKOV: I supplied it with material.
VYSHINSKY: That is being a contributor.
RYKOV: A contributor is one who writes.
VYSHINSKY: And you did not write, you only supplied material. You were a co-contributor.
RYKOV: That is a matter of words and style.
VYSHINSKY: But that is the idea. You had connections
with the "Sotsialistichesky Vestnik" and supplied it with various kinds of material. What kind of material?
RYKOV: The material chiefly concerned the same question
about which Chernov spoke, in the period 1928-30, in connection
with the difficulties with the kulaks which the Party was at that
time overcoming.
VYSH INS KY: This material was selected tendentiously?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps it was of a slanrlerous character?
RYKOV: Tendentious and slanderous, the one easily passes
into the other.
·
VYSHINSKY: That is what I am asking. Did your material
pass from the tendentious to the slanderous?
RYKOV: It is difficult to draw a line between these concepts.
VYSHINSKY: In a word, it was both.
RYKOV: In an acute question like this, everything tendentious is slanderous.
VYSH INSKY: What post did you hold at that time?
RYKOV: At that time I was Chairman of the Council of
People's Commissars of the U.S.S.R. and of the R.S.F.S.R.
VYSHINSKY: And at the same time you were sending material of a slanderous character to the "Sotsialistichesky Vestnik"?
Do I understand you correctly?
RYKOV: Quite correctly.
VYSH INS KY: A praiseworthy occupation!
RYKOV: If it were a praiseworthy occupation, it would :not
be my misfortune to be talking to you now.
VYSHINSKY: That is perfectly true.
RYKOV: Now about the second task. Chcrnov is very much
rushing the events, because in this case the question of. the
seizure of power, which was before us and which I too had raised,

95

<!ates not to 1928 but to the beginning of 1930. I did not say this
then, I could not have said it, because I spoke about it two or three
years later, whereas at that time this question was not before us.
VYSH INS KY: Then let us ascertain what exactly you did
say at that time. You talked about two purposes. The first
purpose was to inform Dan about the internal situation in the

u.s.s.R.

RYKOV: Yes, to endeavour through Dan to supply definite
tendentious information about the state of affairs in the countryside an<! about the rural policy of the Party.
VYSH INS KY: That was one task. What was the other?
RYKOV: The second task was to secure support from the parties of the Second International for our position, the position we
lleld on this question.
VYSHINSKY: Please explain.
RYKOV: Our position in 1928-29 was as follows: a struggle
·chiefly in legal forms, as expressed in Bukharin's utterances, in
the fight against the Central Committee, and in utilizing the congresses of the trade unions; and we were only in the first stage of
the formation of an illegal organization, which was beginning to
be formed, but which was not yet the decisive factor in our struggle against the Central Committee.
VYSHINSKY: That I understand. But when you say that
Chernov and Dan placed before the parties of the Second International the question of supporting your struggle, what are you referring to? In what forms was this struggle expressed, and in what
way was the Second International to support you?
RYKOV: To get the public organizations of the bourgeois
states to put such pressure on the Central Committee of the
C.P.S.U. as to make it change its policy. In 1928 the possibility and
hope of this had not been abandoned either by myself or by the
other members of the organization.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, these were the two tasks you
had set yourselves and it was in connection with them that you
gave your commission to Chernov?
· RYKOV: Yes. And later he informed me, directly or through
a third party-I do not quite remember just now-that he had fulfilled this commission.
VYSHINSKY: When were you informed of this?
RYKOV: It was after Chernov's return, about three or four
months later.
VYSHINSKY: And in 1930 you had a special conversation with
Chernov in which you raised the question of overthrowing the Soviet power?
RYKOV: I do not remember having such a conversation with
96

Chernov, but of course the possibility of such a conversation is not
precluded.
VYSH INS KY: Since you set yourself such a task, of course
this possibility was not precluded.
Accused Chernov, do you consider that what the accused Rykov
has said here is true?
CHERNOV: I confirm it, but I consider that Rykov is telling
only half the truth. He has not told the Court that he gave me a commission for Dan to speak not only about the assistance of the Socialist
Parties belonging to the Second International, but also that Dan,
through the leaders of the Second International, should get the
bou·rgeois governments to intensify the hostile attitude to the
Soviet Union.
VYSHINSKY: Is that how you understood Rykov's commission?
CHERNOV: Yes, that is how I understood it and that is how it
really was.
VYSHINSKY: One is not much different from the other.
CHERNOV: It is not, but it is only half the truth.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, do you insist upon your testimony?
RYKOV: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: So at that time you did not give these instructions in such a sharp form?
RYKOV: This question arose later.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you, accused Chernov, affirm
that the chief task and the chief commission which the accused
Rykov gave you consisted not so much in giving information as in
arranging for assistance by imperialist states hostile to the U .S.S.R.
-is that what you affirm?
CHERNOV: Yes, yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: Did you subsequently speak to Rykov on similar subjects?
CHERNOV: Yes, I did. I shall speak about that later.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us about it now.
CHERNOV: When I returned from abroad I saw Rykov and
told him how I had fulfilled the commission he had given me for
Dan.
VYSHINSKY: Had you fulfilled that commission?
CHERNOV: I had. I went to see Dan and conveyed the commission from the Right centre. I did not receive a reply at once,
because Dan said that he could not give it at once and would have
to consult the leaders of the Second International. A few days
later, at a second meeting, I received a favourable reply from Dan
on all these questions.
VYSHINSKY: And did you inform Rykov of this?
7

97

CHERNOV: Yes, I did inform Rykov of this.
VYSHINSKY: Eye to eye?
CHERNOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: May I interrogate Rykov on this subject? Do you
confirm this?
RYKOV: I have already said that on his return, I do not remember whether he did so personally or through a third party, he
told me that he had fulfilled the commission.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Chernov, continue.
CHERNOV: I forgot to say that during this same meeting I
was commissioned, not by Rykov but by Tomsky, to form a Right
organization among my acquaintances, if there should happen to
be such on the staff of the Trade Representation and the Embassy in
Germany. This I also fulfilled upon my arrival in Germany, when
I met Yanovitsky. I learnt from him that he had looked up Kibrik and knew his telephone number and address, and that I could
get in touch with him. When I arrived in Berlin !telephoned Kibrik and we arranged to meet in the Bavarian Hall of the Vaterland
Restaurant. It was there that the meeting with him took place.
Kibrik and I were quite pleased to meet each other as old
friends. In the course of the conversation I told him, as a good
comrade, about my sentiments, my political sentiments, of
course, and among other things told him that it was very necessary that I meet Dan, saying why I had to see him. Kibrik
said that he could arrange the meeting.
VYSHINSKY: Did the meeting take place?
CHERNOV: Yes, I shall tell you everything in detail presently.
We agreed that Kibrik should arrange my meeting with Dan in
Konigstein; I went there for a cure and the meeting took place in
Konigstein. Kibrik called for me and we went to the hotel where
Dan was staying. There the meeting with Dan took place in private,
because Kibrik left. I told Dan about the state of affairs in the
Soviet Union, painted a gloomy picture of the position of agriculture in the Ukraine, and conveyed to him all the commissions
I had received from the Right centre, as represented by Rykov.
Dan replied that he considered the proposal of the Right centre
quite acceptable. "But," he said, "I must ask you a specific
question. I have known you for a long time. What is your own
opinion of the strength of the Right organization?" I replied that
the Rights possessed enough forces to seize power and to hold it,
adding that they had connections, sufficient connections, among
military men. Dan replied that I was wrong there. Even if the
Rights seized power, they could not retain it for any length of time
without proper support, and above all the armed support of capitalist states. Furthermore, he said, you must work in such a way

98

as to undermine the economic and potiticat might or the Soviet
Union. I remember very clearly the expression he used: "You must
not shrink from any means. Whoever fights for the overthrow of
pow~r and shrinks fro~ u~ing any particular means is a political
Mamlov. And the cap1tahst states must be helped even now in
their struggle against the Soviet Union." Such were the results
of my meeting with Dan. A few days later I was invited by Kibrik
to Berlin. I went. This second meeting with Dan took place in
Kibrik 's apartment. Dan told me that he had managed to communicate with leaders of the Second International and asked me to
convey to Rykov that the leaders of the Second International fully
accepted the proposals which I had transmitted to them from the
Right centre. Thereupon Dan reverted to the question that power
could not be retained by the Rights without the assistance of the
armed capitalist governments. He again stressed the point that I,
in particular, as a member ofa Right organization which was combating the Soviet power, should help the capitalist states in their
struggle against the Soviet power, inasmuch as our aims coincided.
I asked him what form this help could take. Dan did not give a
direct and definite answer to this, but said that assistance could
be of the most varied kind; if occasion to give assistance should
lie in your path, you should give it. I also asked Dan how connections could be established between the Right centre and Dan in
the future. Dan replied that I need not worry on this score; Rykov
would find ways of establishing these connections. "But," he
said, "I want you personally to maintain connections with me
through Kibrik." That was the result of this meeting with Dan.
After my talk with Dan, which, as I said, took place in Kibrik's
apartment, Dan left, and I remained for supper with Kibrik. I was
to leave for the station after supper. During supper we drank
rather heavily. On the plea of some engagement, Kibrik said that
he could not accompany me to the station. He put me on a bus and
I left him in order to return to Konigstein.
VYSHINSKY: Did you get to the station?
CHERNOV: No, but I got to the Polizeiprasidium instead. In the
bus several Germans tried to pick a quarrel with me. One of them
pushed me, and I pushed him in return.
VYSHINSKY: Hard?
CHERNOV: Well, I am not so strong physically as to give a
hard push; at any rate I pushed him as hard as I could.
VYSHINSKY: Well, and what happened?
CHERNOV: What happened was that three Germans seized
hold of me, stopped the bus, put me into a taxi and drove me to
the Polizeiprasidium.
At the Polizeiprasidium I protested and demanded to be released.
I was told that I would have to await the arrival of the chief in the
7*

99

morning. I spent the night there. In the morning some kind of
official who spoke Russian very well appeared, and I at once protested to him. He said he would have to report the matter to the
chief. After some time a man appeared who introduced himself
as Colonel Oberhaus. He pulled out a protocol and translated it
to me. I was accused of maiming Germans, for which I was criminally liable. Moreover, I was told that a copy of the protocol
would be sent to our Embassy. And thereupon he proposed that
I should become an agent of the German intelligence service.
I refused. Oberhaus then said that he knew something about my
dealings in Germany. I asked him what he knew. He said that he
knew about my meetings with Dan and showed me several photographs of my meetings with Dan, taken both in Konigstein and in
Berlin. At the same time he gave me a brief summary of the conversation with Dan.
VYSHINSKY: Whose?
CHERNOV: My conversation with Dan. His account contained
a clear repetition of Dan's words. It then became absolutely obvious
to me that the trap which had been set for me in Germany had been
arranged by the German intelligence service with the full support
of Dan himself and with Dan's participation, and that Dan himself was undoubtedly an agent of the German intelligence service,
and so was Kibrik.
.VYSHINSKY: And did what you were charged with in the
Polizeiprasidium correspond to the truth?
CHERNOV: The protocol? It was drawn up tendentiously.
I could not have maimed anyone.
VYSHINSKY: About the conversation with Dan?
CHERNOV: That did correspond with what Dan and I actually
talked about.
VYSHINSKY: Did your conversation with Dan take place in
anybody's presence?
CHERNOV: The conversation in Konigstein took place privately. Kibrik conducted me to Dan's room, but then left.
VYSHINSKY: And so the police official could learn about the
conversation only from you or from Dan?
CHERNOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: If you could not have transmitted the conversation, it means that the police learnt about it from Dan. And if
Dan informed the police about it, it means that he is an agent
of the police?
CHERNOV: Yes, otherwise he would not have transmitted it.
After this I consented, and became a German spy.
VYSHINSKY: That is, you got caught yourself?
CHERNOV: Yes. This was followed by various formalities
questionnaires, and a signed pledge. Oberhaus instructed me about

100

the work I was to perform in the Soviet Union on Germany's
behalf. Seeing how upset I was, he said: "There is no need to get
upset. You are fighting the Soviet power, and so are we, and
even our methods of fighting will very likely coincide in the near
future."
VYSHINSKY: Did this reassure you?
CHERNOV: It did not.
VYSHINSKY: But he tried to reassure you?
CHERNOV: The tasks set by Oberhaus amounted to this: I had
to give systematic information to the German intelligence service on
questions of interest to it which would be submitted to me through
a representative of the German intelligence service in Moscow.
I had also to organize diversive-wrecking activities in my field of
work. As I was at that time working on grain collections, I had
above all to do wrecking work in the sphere of grain collections.
VYSHINSKY: What form did your collaboration with the German intelligence service take?
CHERNOV: Oberhaus advised me, in order to avert exposure,
not to extend my connections with the Rights too widely, but to
maintain connections with a limited number of persons and to consolidate these connections. Oberhaus told me that I would not be
disturbed in Moscow for some time, so as to enable me to arrange
my spy work in the Soviet Union. And it is true that nobody came
to see me at first. Several months passed and in 1930 I had a
meeting with a representative of the German intelligence service.
VYSHINSKY: How did it take pface?
CHERNOV: I was then either Assistant People's Commissar
or a member of the Collegi urn of the People's Commissariat of
Trade, I cannot recall which. The Information Bureau of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs telephoned me and said that
Paul Scheffer, correspondent of the German "Berliner Tageblatt,,,
would come and see me to get some information. I was to give him
information that was not of a confidential character. Shortly after
Scheffer did come to see me and said that he had been sent by
Colonel Oberhaus. He gave the password "Reinhold. "That was my
pseudonym as a German spy. I asked Scheffer what Colonel Oberhaus wanted. On that occasion he demanded information on the
internal affairs of the Party, on the state of work among the Rights
and Trotskyites, and on conditions in the rural districts. He moreover demanded special information about stocks of industrial
goods. He was particularly interested in the stocks of industrial
goods in the towns. He demanded information about the progress
of the grain collections and about the grain mobilization stocks.
Part of the information demanded-about the situation within
the Party and about the work among the Rights-I gave him verbally on the spot; the figures I gave him a few days later.
101

After this I had a number of periodical meetings with Scheffer.
I transmitted information to the German intelligence service, and
through him received instructions from the latter about the organization of wrecking work. I had an especially long conversation with
Scheffer on the organization of wrecking work in the sphere of grain
collections and grain supplies. The chief task assigned to me by the
German intelligence service at that time was to arrange to spoil
grain within the country. This involved delaying the construction
of storehouses and elevators, so as to create a discrepancy between
the growing size of the grain collections and the available storage
space. In this way, Scheffer said, two things would be achieved: firstly, the grain itself would be spoilt; and, secondly, the indignation
of the peasants would be aroused, which was inevitable when they saw
that grain was perishing. I was also askedtoarrangeforthewholesale contamination of storehouses by pests, and especially by corn
beetle. Scheffer especially demanded that arrangements be made
to contaminate the mobilization stocks with storehouse pests and
corn beetle. These commissions that Scheffer gave me I carried out.
Then Scheffer left the Soviet Union. Before his departure he told
me that in view of the danger of exposure he would have to leave
for Germany, but that the German intelligence service would not
fail to establish connections with me.
My connections with representatives of the German intelligence service were resumed when I had already gone to work in the
Committee of Agricultural Stocks. Espionage and wrecking activities became particularly intense after I was appointed People's
Commissar of Agriculture. Several months after I had been appointed People's Commissar of Agriculture of the U.S.S.R., I was visited at the Commissariat by a certain Raivid, a former comrade
of mine in the Menshevik organization in lvanovo, who had been
working in the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs for a long
time. We met from time to time, and I was therefore not surprised
when he came to see me at the People's Commissariat of Agriculture. But when we were alone in my office.together, he said: "You
and I have got to have a serious talk, Reinhold.,, That word was
enough, everything was clear. It transpired that Raivid was a residential agent of the German intelligence service in the Soviet
Union, and that he had received instructions from Oberhaus to
establish connections with me. Raivid and I met several times.
When I went to work at the People's Commissariat of Agriculture
our meetings were devoted to working out a detailed program of
wrecking and diversive work in the sphere of agriculture on fundamental and crucial questions. This program, which was drawn
up in accordance with the demands of the German intelligence
service, included wrecking activities in such fields as seed, crop
rotation, machine and tractor stations and stock~breeding. The

102

German intelligence service made a special point of the organization of wrecking activities in the sphere of horse-breeding in
order, as Raivid said, not to provide horses for the Red Army.
As r.egards. s~ed, we included in our program muddling up seed
a~fairs! mixrng up sorted seed and thus lowering the harvest
yield rn the country. As regards crop rotation, the idea was
to plan the crop area incorrectly and thus place the collective
farm pe3:sants in such a position that they would be virtually unable
to practise proper crop rotation and would be obliged to plough
up meadows and pastures for crop growing. This would reduce the
size of harvests in the country and at the same time rouse the indignation of the peasants, who would be unable to understand why
they were being forced to plough up meadows and pastures when
the collective farms wanted to develop stock-breeding and required
fodder for the purpose.
As regards the machine and tractor stations, the aim was to
put tractors, harvester combines and agricultural machines out
of commission, to muddle the financial affairs of the machine and
tractor stations, and for this purpose to place at the head of the
machine and tractor stations useless people, people with bad records, and above all members of our Right organization.
As regards stock breeding, the aim was to kill off pedigree
breed-stock and to strive for a high cattle mortality ... to prevent
the development of fodder resources and especially to infect cattle
artificially with various kinds of bacteria in order to increase their
mortality.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us in greater detail about the cattle mortality, where you got the bacteria from, what kind of bacteria,
and so on.
CHERNOV: I must tell you what I told Rykov during my meetings with him in 1935. I told him that I had made preparations for
certain acts of diversion, and Rykov gave his approval.
I performed the following acts of diversion. In order to caus~
heavy cattle mortality in Eastern Siberia, I instructed Ginsburg,
Chief of the Veterinary Department, who belonged to the organization of the Rights, and through him the Chief of the Veterinary
Supply Department, who also belonged to the organization of the
Rights, not to supply anti-anthrax serum to Eastern Siberia,
knowing that Eastern Siberia was particularly liable to anthrax.
The serum was not supplied to Eastern Siberia. The preparations
for this were made in 1935, and when there was an outbreak of
anthrax there in 1936 it turned out that no serum was available,
with the result that I cannot say how many exactly, but at any
rate over 25 1000 horses perished.
Secondly, I instructed Ginsburg and Boyarshinov, Chief of the
Bacteriological Department, to artificially infect pigs with erysip·
103

elas in the Leningrad Region and with plague in the Voronezh Region
and the Azov-Black Sea Territory. I chose these two bacteria because the pigs are inoculated not with dead microbes, but with live
ones, only of reduced virulence. It was therefore quite simple from
the technical standpoint to organize artificial infection. Secondly;
in the case of these two diseases there is a rule that when plague
breaks out in any particular district, a II the pigs in that district
have to be inoculated. This made it possible at once to spread the
disease on a large scale.
For this purpose, three factories were selected at my suggestion:
Kashintsevo, Orel and Stavropol. In these factories serums were
made with virulent bacteria and given special serial numbers.
Boyarshinov was informed of these serial numbers and he transmitted them to the chiefs of veterinary departments in the localities who could be relied upon in this matter, and they in turn transmitted them to veterinary surgeons who had anti-Soviet feelings
and who in case of a heavy cattle mortality would not raise a big
fuss .
. . . In this way these serums were distributed and artificial
infection was carried out in these three regions.
It is difficult to estimate the results, but at any rate it may be
taken for granted that several tens of thousands of pigs perished
owing to this diversive act.
VYSHINSKY: Is that all?
CHERNOV: That is all with regard to diversive acts. As to my
connections with the German intelligence service, I have nothing
to add and would like to continue my testimony regarding my connections with the Right centre and with Rykov.
VYSHINSKY: One more question with regard to your connections with the German intelligence service. Did you receive any
money from the intelligence service?
CHERNOV: Yes, I quite forgot about that.
• VYSHINSKY: Why, of course, it is such a trifling matter that
you forgot about it.
CHERNOV: It is not a trifling matter, of course, but I forgot
about it. In Berlin I received 2,000 marks ....
VYSHINSKY: How much did you receive in all?
CHERNOV: Roughly about 30,000 German marks and about
150,000 rubles in Soviet money. A considerable part of these sums
was spent on my personal needs,. but a certain part was spent
in bribing members of the Right organization whom I thought it
necessary to bribe.
VYSHINSKY: And so part of the money received was used for
bribery, but the greater part for your personal needs.
CHERNOV: Absolutely right.
VYSHINSKY: Thus it _may be said that. you not only fell into
104

the net skilfully spread by the German intelligence service but
that you deliberately sold yourself for money to the enemy?
CHERNOV: Absolutely right.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us about your subsequent connections with
Rykov.
CHERNOV: I shall continue on the subject of my connections
with the Right organization and with Rykov. In addition to those
meetings with Rykov I have recounted, I had the following meeting
with him in December 1930. He invited me himself and the meeting took place at his apartment. Rykov and Tomsky, who was also
present at the meeting, were in a jubi !ant frame of mind.
The feeling was that a peasant uprising was inevitable in the
near future, which, with proper leadership by the Right
organization, might lead to the seizure of power in the country.
Right there, Tomsky said among other things that the Right
centre had taken measures to secure certain prominent posts
for representatives of the Right organization. This, he claimed,
was very necessary in order to accomplish a "palace coup" in the .
country. I there received instructions from Rykov also to organize
wrecking activities. The task set me by Rykov was to arouse the
anger of the peasants against the policy of the Party and against
the Soviet government by extending to the middle peasants the
repressive measures established for the kulaks, and to rouse discontent among the workers by disorganizing the supply of bread.
The .next time I met Rykov, again on his invitation, was in
October, it seems to me, but at any rate in the autumn of 1932.
This meeting took place at the time when a profound change had
taken place in the countryside. The collective farm movement had
grown strong, the kulaks had been smashed and the rural districts
were already beginning to feel tangible results from the industrialization of the country. Although Rykov attempted to maintain an
air of serenity it was clear that he was nonplussed by the failure of
the political predictions he had been making until then, and in his
conversation with me he told me that we must go still more deeply
underground and orientate ourselves for the seizure of power on
the carrying out of a "palace coup." I said: "In 1930, too, you
spoke to me about a 'palace coup.' What then is the difference
between the line of 1930 and the line of 1932?" He answered that
the difference was that in 1930 it was one of the possible variants,
but that now it was the most decisive and most important variant
for the seizure of power. As he put it, we must seize power in the
country by means of a "palace coup," that is, the arrest and
assassination of the leaders of the Party and the government.
VYSHINSKY: This was the second meeting since 1930?
CHERNOV: The first meeting was in 1930, but this was in
1932.
105

VYSHINSKY: When was the next meeting?
CHERNOV: The next meeting was in 1934, a few months after I was appointed People's Commissar of Agriculture of the
U.S.S.R. Rykov invited me to his summer residence. This
meeting took place in private and was mainly devoted to the organization of my work as a member of the Right organization in connection with my appointment to the post of People's Commissar of
Agriculture of the U.S.S.R. The task Rykov set me was to organize my work in such a way as to undermine the coIIective farm
system. For this purpose the guidance of the collective farms was
to be conducted in such a way as to deprive the collective farmer of all interest in collective farm production, to which end
collective farming was to be conducted in such a way that the
coIIective farmer would receive next to nothing for his workdays. The plan of wrecking work in its entirety we did not draw
up concretely, but agreed that I, together with a small group of
members of the Right organization in the People's Commissariat
of Agriculture, should draw up and proceed to carry out a concrete
plan of wrecking measures in the sphere of agriculture.
My next and last meeting with Rykov took place either at the
end of 1935 or in the beginning of 1936-1 do not quite remember
which. This was the time when the famous conferences were being
held in the Kremlin between leaders of the Party and the government and the foremost people in agriculture. The instructions Rykov
gave at this meeting were as follows. He said that we cannot but take
note of the growth and consolidation of the collective farms in the
country and the growth of new coIIective farm cadres revealed at
these conferences. But this, he said, by no means implies that there
are no forces in the countryside which we could organize. And as an
example of these forces he pointed out the kulak elements who had
returned from special exile settlements and the elements with antiSoviet feelings from among the old rural intelligentsia-agronomists,
doctors, stock-breeding experts, etc. These forces, he claimed, must
be mobilized to the utmost and utilized for our purposes. And he particularly stressed the point that there were only two ways by which
the Rights could seize power in the country, namely, the forcible removal of the leadership of the Party and the leadership of the government, that is, their arrest or assassination, or both. And he laid particular stress on the necessity for the defeat of the Soviet Union ina war
with capitalist countries, should the latter attack us. And in this
connection he particularly referred to the importance of organizing wrecking and diversive work, saying that since we needed
the defeat of the Soviet Union for the conquest of power in the
country, we should expedite this defeat, and should likewise expedite the outbreak of the war itself by diminishing the economic
and defensive power of the Soviet Union. Such was the gist of our
106

conversation in 1935. I repeat that at this meeting I informed
Rykov about the diversive acts I have mentioned, particularly about
the artificial infection of cattle, just as I informed him at every
meeting about the wrecking work I had organized both in the
sphere of grain collections in the Committee of Agricultural Stocks
and in the sphere of agriculture in the People's Commissariat of
Agriculture.
VYSHINSKY: Is that all? And so your last meeting with
Rykov was in 1936?
CHERNOV: Either at the end of 1935 or at the beginning of
1936. I must add that Rykov told me that he could not see me
any more because he feared exposure. He was being closely
watched. He proposed that I establish connections with another,
reserve centre through Lyubimov.
VYSHINSKY: And so your first conspiratorial meeting with
Rykov took place in 1928 and the last in 1936, or at the end of
1935?
CHERNOV: Correct.
VYSHINSKY: So that in 1928you met Rykovand discussed with
him your part in the struggle against the Soviet power?
CHERNOV: Correct.
VYSHINSKY: You carried out his commission to establish
connections with Dan while you were abroad?
CHERNOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you meet him in 1929?
CHERNOV: I met him in 1929 for a short while for information.
VYSHINSKY: In 1930 you again met him on the same basis
of your common crimes?
CHERNOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In 1932 you again met him on the basis of these
same common crimes?
CHERNOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In 1934 you again met him on the basis of
this same common criminal activity, and, finally, at the end of
1935 or the beginning of 1936 you met him once more on this same
common basis of criminal activity, and then, for reasons of
secrecy, broke. off connections with him?
CHERNOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: The character of your meetings with Rykov was
that you received from Rykov orders and instructions with regard
to your criminal activities? Is that so?
CHERNOV: It is.
VYSHINSKY: They had no connection with the official position of the accused Rykov?
CHERNOV: Absolutely none.
107.

VYSHINSKY: You, while People's Commissar of Agriculture
of the U.S.S.R., went to a man who held the post of People's
Commissar of Post and Telegraph and received certain instructions'
from him? That is, the connections were exclusively criminal?
CHERNOV: Exclusively criminal.
VYSHINSKY: Exclusively criminal connections in the sphere
of the organization of crimes against the Soviet power and against
the Party.
Permit me to interrogate the accused Rykov.
Accused Rykov, do you agree with this estimate of your connections with Chernov?
RYKOV: After the meeting at which he reported on his meeting with Dan, I personally cannot recall all the rest of what
Chernov said here, although much of what he says and relates
coincided and coincides with the counter-revolutionary line and
that counter-revolutionary work which I performed at the corresponding time. But as regards a "palace coup," I cannot admit that
I could have informed Chernov of it, because we kept it the greatest
secret, and I could have informed only those people who would be
directly drawn into the matter. As to the other questions he
touched on, I have no objections to make. When my turn comes I
shall speak of the formulations of which Chernov spoke. I shall
tell of my counter-revolutionary and treasonable activities.
VYSHINSKY: So what he says is essentially correct?
RYKOV. Yes, but as to the last meeting, I know nothing.
CHERNOV: How could Alexei Ivanovich have forgotten about
these three meetings?
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, during the period 1930-36,
did you have meetings with other people in your criminal activities?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Numerous meetings?
RYKOV. Of course.
VYSHINSKY: And so you might have forgotten with whom you
spoke and about what?
RYKOV: That I could completely have forgotten what
Chernov says-five or six meetings-that cannot be.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have many accomplices like Chernov?
RYKOV: That was my mistake; but I do not consider him
a very important accomplice. On the way from the restaurant to the
station he managed to land in the Polizeiprasidium.
VYSHINSKY: Here, for example, are the prisoners in the
dock; there are quite a number of your accomplices. Was Chernov
one of them?
RYKOV: Yes.
108

VYSHlNSKY: And did you, accused Chernov, have many leaders like Rykov?
CHERNOV: None except Rykov and the German intelligence
service.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
CHERNOV: I have a question to ask Rykov.
How is it that you cannot explain? You are one of the chief
leaders of the Right centre and I am the People's Commissar of
Agriculture.
VYSHINSKY: You were.
CHERNOV: Yes, I was. That means, I am in charge of
agriculture. You know that I am a member of your organization.
How could you, having a member of your organization occupying the post of People's Commissar of Agriculture, not invite
him to discuss the utilization of his position in the interests of
the Right organization?
Please forgive me for my rudeness, but either you were a bad
leader of the Right organization, which I do not think, or you do
not want to confess. I cannot conceive that you could have forgotten, I do not want to say that I was a big personage and so on,
but how you could have forgotten a meeting with the People's
Commissar of Agriculture on the subject of wrecking work is hard
to understand.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Chernov, you remember these meetings well?
CHERNOV: I remember them well, I remember some of the
expressions well. I repeat that what I have told the Court was the
who le truth.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rykov, do you want to reply to
Chernov's question?
RYKOV: He has replied too well. Perhaps I should have done
as he says. It was a mistake on my part.
THE PRESIDENT:~TheI.Court adjourns until 11 a.m. tomorrow.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Anny Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

109

A.BATNER
Military Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, MARCH~.3, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Be seated. The session of the MilitaryCol1egium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. is resumed. We
shall proceed to the examination of the accused Ivanov.
.
Accused Ivanov, do you confirm the testimony you gave during the preliminary investigation regardi!lg your anti-Soviet
activities?
IVANOV: Fully and entirely. I consider myself responsible
and guilty of the gravest crimes. I was one of the active members
of the group of the Rights, the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
For these gravest crimes I am prepared to bear any penalties
that the Soviet Court may deem necessary to impose upon me,
and to do everything within my power to expose all my treacherous activities and to divulge all the vileness, despicableness
and treason to the whole Soviet Union, to the Party and to the
people, and the treasonable and treacherous activities of the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and of the group of the Rights.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you any questions, Comrade Procurator?
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ivanov, do you admit that you were
a member of the underground Right-Trotskyite anti-Soviet organization?
IVANOV: I admit that I was an active member.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, under what circumstances and when
did you join this underground anti-Soviet organization?
IVANOV: Perhaps I may be permitted to mention certain
criteria, what created the conditions and led me to adopt this
path?
VYSHINSKY: That is what I am asking you.
IVANOV: My first fall dates back to 191 I, when I was a student at the Tula gymnasium, in the eighth class. The tsarist
Okhrana managed to recruit me as one of its agents.
VYSHINSKY: How exactly were you recruited?
IVANOV: I was a very unru1y element in the school. In the
eighth class, the last class, I was several times threatened with
expulsion.

110

VYSH!NSKY: With what particular institution Were you
connected as an Okhrana agent; in what city?
IVANOV: In the city of Tula. I committed my first act of
treachery in the following way . . . .
VYSH INS KY: I ask you: what institution were you connected
with?
IVANOV: With the Okhrana Department of the Gendarmerie
of the City of Tula.
VYSHINSKY: That is, with the Provincial Department of
Gendarmerie in Tula?
IVANOV: Yes, in the city of Tula itself.
VYSHINSKY: What form did your work and activity as an
Okhrana agent take?
IVANOV: In Tula I had taken part in a rowdy affair in the
eighth class which led to the dismissal of the German language
teacher, a woman, who was very much disliked by the students.
I was one of the active instigators of this dismissal. I betrayed
a group of students who had arranged this business-a certain
Fromerd and Yudin.
VYSHINSKY: What next?
IVANOV: Later, before entering the Moscow University, and
before leaving for Moscow, I severed connections with the Okhrana. For two or three months before my departure for Moscow
I had no more connections with them. In 1912 I entered the Moscow University. In 1913 I took part in one of the strikes at the
university. I was expelled from the university; a large number
of students were expelled at that time. In Moscow the Okhrana
department again laid hold of me.
VYSHINSKY: In Tula, with whom were you connected personally?
IVANOV: With Captain Mamatkazin.
VYSHINSKY: How long were you an agent of the Okhrana
in Tula?
IVANOV: I was recruited at the end of 1911, and roughly
in June or July 1912 connections were severed . . . .
VYSHINSKY: I want to elucidate the circumstances of this
connection. So in Tula you were connected with Captain Mamatkazin as an agent of the Tula Department of the Gendarmerie.
Did you have a secret pseudonym?
IVANOV: I did: "Samarin."
VYSHINSKY: Did you have a spy number?
IVANOV: I did: No. 163.
VYSHINSKY: Did you receive any remuneration for your
services?
IVANOV: I received remuneration both in Moscow and in
Tula.

111

VYSH1NSKY: That means you were a paid . . . (
IVANOV: A paid agent of the tsarist Okhrana.
VYSHINSKY: Was this the beginning of your political activities?
IVANOV: This was a shameful period in my life.
VYSHINSKY: Then you came to Moscow and entered the
Moscow University in 1912.
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You suffered no unpleasant consequences in
connection with the strike? You averted them by your treachery?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You came to Moscow and entered the Moscow
University in 1912?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY; What faculty?
IVANOV: The Medical Faculty.
VYSHINSKY: You came to Moscow. Did you bring no connections with the Okhrana along with you?
IVANOV: No, I had severed these connections.
VYSHINSKY: What form did the severance of your connections
take?
IVANOV: For two months before I left for Moscow I went
there no longer and was no longer disturbed by them. I did not
pay the regular visit . . . .
VYSHINSKY: And they did not disturb you?
IVANOV: No, they did not.
VYSHINSKY: You did not sever connections by announcing
that you did not wish to work any more?
IVANOV: No, I simply did not go there any more and they
did not disturb me.
VYSHINSKY: And if they had disturbed you?
IVANOV: If they had disturbed me, as happened later, when·
I was all the time being threatened with exposure, I certainly
would have gone.
VYSHINSKY: As happened . . .
IVANOV: As happened in 1913 in Moscow.
VYSHINSKY: And so we can put it that you did not sever
connections, but that there was a temporary suspension of your
provocateur activities for reasons that did not entirely depend
upon you?
IVANOV: Correct.
VYSHINSKY: In 1913 you were active as an Okhrana
agent?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In Moscow?
112

IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: With whom were you connected?
IVANOV: With Captain Gryaznov and Lieutenant-Colonel
Kolokolov.
VYSHINSKY: What form did your provocateur work take?
IVANOV: I gave information about the revolutionary movement in the student organizations, and information about individual comrades who were carrying on revolutionary work.
For instance, I betrayed the revolutionaries Severny and Pomorov
of the Tula Fellowship. In 1916 I betrayed Kaplun, one of the
most active spirits in revolutionary work in the Medical Faculty.
VYSHINSKY: Who is this Kaplun?
IVANOV: I think he is at present a professor on questions
of labour protection.
VYSHINSKY: Professor of Social Hygiene in the Moscow
University?
IVANOV: I do not know. He mostly worked in Soviet institutions. He got an academic degree.
VYSHINSKY: He was a student at that time?
IVANOV: Yes, a student in the final course, and one of the
most active spirits in revolutionary work. He was the head of
our seniors.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances did you betray him?
IVANOV: I do not remember exactly whether it was in 1915
or 1916. Lieutenant-Colonel Kolokolov summoned me and demanded information about Kaplun, who was known for his revolutionary activities in the Medical Faculty. It was then that I began
giving information. In 1916, on Kaplun's initiative, a meeting
of representatives of the student organizations was called in connection with the growing revolutionary movement. I betrayed
this illegal meeting, and at the same time I betrayed Kaplun.
I spent the night with him and tried to persuade him not to destroy the revolutionary literature he had, because I knew that
he was to be arrested that night. Kaplun proved to be much cleverer than I, and more cautious with respect to the Okhrana:
he had already destroyed this literature before the meeting. It
is true that he was arrested, but the Okhrana could find nothing that directly incriminated him, such as revolutionary literature; and after a month of confinement, he was released.
I then gave information about the activities of the Bolshevik
organization in the Commercial Institute. I had connections with
Ter, the leader of the Bolsheviks in the Institute.
VYSHINSKY: And so you wormed your way in there too?
IVANOV: Yes, I was connected with the Bolshevik organization at the Institute, and I was told to gain access to the organization and to give information.
8

113

VYSHlNSKY: Who told you to do this?
IVANOV: Lieutenant-Colonel Kolokolov.
VYSHINSKY: What information did you supply about this
organization?
IVANOV: I gave information about the revolutionary sentiments and about the most energetic and active people in it. Then
I gave warning that a meeting of students and workers was to be
held. Ter was to have been seized at this meeting, but he managed
to leap out of the window.
VYSHINSKY: Did you also betray any of the people belonging
to this Bolshevik group to the Okhrana?
IVANOV: I betrayed only Ter, but he managed to get away.
VYSHINSKY: Did you commit other acts of treachery during this period?
IVANOV: I think that is all.
VYSHINSKY: How long were you an agent of the Moscow
Okhrana?
IVANOV: From 1913 to the end of 1916.
VYSHINSKY: Did you receive remuneration?
IVANOV: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: What remuneration did you receive?
IVANOV: From the Tula Okhrana I first received 15 rubles
and then 20 rubles.
VYSHINSKY: And from the Moscow Okhrana?
IVANOV: I first received 30 rubles and 40 rubles and then rose
to 60 and 75 rubles. As the quality of my work improved, my pay
increased.
VYSHINSKY: You were connected with the Moscow Okhrana
up to the end of 1916. And from the end of 1916?
IVANOV: At the end of 1916 I severed connections with the
Okhrana.
VYSHINSKY: just as you severed them in Tula?
IVANOV: No, I severed them for good. I made up my mind
that, if necessary, I would even leave the university and clear out.
VYSHINSKY: What was the reason for this decision?
IVANOV: I was brought up in such conditions, I was so closely connected with the interests of the revolution and the working
class. . . .
VYSHINSKY: How were you connected? You were connected
just the other way round.
IVANOV: When I grew up . . .
VYSHINSKY: In the eighth class at school you became an
agent-provocateur. At the time you were groW;ing up you were
an agent-provocateur.
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: At the age of 19 you were an agent-provocateur.
114

IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: At the age of 20 you were an agent-provocateur.
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Your whole growth was one of an agent-provocateur.
IVANOV: You did not understand me . . . .
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, why at the end of 1916 did you decide
to sever connections with the Okhrana?
IVANOV: In the first place it weighed on my mind; and in
the second place I was frightened by th.e growing revolutionary
movement and the prospects of a victory for the working class;
I feared that when the working class was victorious the documents
of the Okhrana might fall into the hands of the revolutionary
organizations and I would be exposed as an agent-provocateur.
VYSHINSKY: Well, that is a different story. You were just
afraid of having to pay the reckoning.
IVANOV: That is so.
VYSHINSKY: Then what has your connection with the revolutionary movement got to do with it?
IVANOV: No, I did not say that it was my connection with
the revolutionary movement.
·vYSHINSKY: You talked about your revolutionary training.
Your training was quite a definite one. You began your political
training under the guidance of Captain Mamatkazin of the Tula
Okhrana, and finished it under the guidance of Bukharin and
Rykov. Do I understand you rightly?
IVANOV: That is so.
VYSHINSKY: Well, that was your political training.
When did you get into the Bolshevik Party?
IVANOV: In 1915.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances? From personal conviction?
IVANOV: I was instructed by Lieutenant-Colonel Kolokolov
to join the Bolshevik Party.
VYSHINSKY: So you joined the Party on the instructions of
Lieutenant-Colonel Kolokolov of the Moscow Okhrana?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: As part of your duties?
IVANOV: There can be no doubt about it.
VYSHINSKY: With what purpose?
IVANOV: With the purpose of obtaining more thorough information about the activities of the Bolshevik organization.
VYSHINSKY: With provocateur; purposes?
IVANOV: Yes, with provocateur purposes.
VYSH INS KY: From what year did you reckon your membership
in the Party?
8*

115

IVANOV: I used to say when filling in questionnaires that I was
a member of the Party since 1915.
VYSHINSKY: But as to your having joined the P~rty on.the
instructions of Lieutenant-Colonel Kolokolov you said nothing,
of course?
IVANOV: That I did not tell anybody.
VYSHINSKY: Until when?
IVANOV: Until the moment of my arrest.
VYSHINSKY: Tell me, please, did you have any connections
with the group of "Left Communists"?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And who brought you into this group?
IVANOV: As a matter of fact, nobody brought me into it, because my original sin and my fear that I might be exposed under the
Soviet power drove me and spurred me into the camp of the enemies,
and like a vulture drawn by the smell of carrion, I joined any hostile
group that was fighting the Soviet power, because I reckoned that
if the bourgeois regime were restored I would not be exposed.
VYSHINSKY: When did you join the "Left Communists"?
IVANOV: At the end of 1917 or the beginning of 1918.
VYSHINSKY: That means that you joined this group as an
enemy who reckoned that through this group you would succeed
in overthrowing the Soviet power?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And you explain this by the fact that you hoped
to legalize your position in this way?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: That means that you were acting as an enemy
of Soviet power?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And the "Left Communists" were the most
suitable group for you?
IVANOV: Yes, they were fighting the Soviet power and the
Party.
VYSHINSKY: By provocateur methods. And that suited you
very well?
IVANOV: I found in the "Left Communists" just what I needed
as an enemy of the Soviet power and the working class.
VYSHINSKY: Specifically, what did you find in the group
of the "Left Communists"?
IVANOV: An opportunity. to combat the Soviet power and
the Party.
VYSHINSKY: An opportunity to combat the revolution, to
combat the working class? And so, if we examine this period,
116

we may s~y that beginning '.rom 1911 and at least until 1918 you
were waging a struggle agarnst the working class?
IVANOV: I was both betraying and waging a struggle.
VYSHINSKY: Were you connected with Bukharin at that
time?
IVANOV: We attended several conferences together. Then Bukharin one day suggested to me that, as a sign of protest against the
Party and against Lenin's line, we must leave the Communist
Party and form our own party. It was reckoned that this might
lead to the collapse of the Communist Party and the victory of the
"Left Communists." But at about this time the following transpired. I was working at that time as a Party organizer in the Basmanny district. I did not succeed in securing the support of the Party
masses for the line of the "Left Communists." The masses solidly
supported Lenin. It became clear to me that the whole work of the
"Left Communists" was doomed to failure, to bankruptcy. I then
left for the front.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
IVANOV: So as to break with the "Left Communists."
VYSHINSKY: Why did you leave for the front?
IVANOV: I left for the front . . . . (A pause.) I had certain
vacillations, and then I thought-out of sight, out of mind, and
that there would be less danger of my exposure as a former agentprovocateur.
VYSHINSKY: You were again running away from the danger
of exposure-and not going in order to defend the Soviet system?
IVANOV: Oh, no.
.
VYSHINSKY: That is what interests me. What did you do
then?
IVANOV: I then met Bukharin at the Tenth Party Congress,
where we had the following conversation. He said that he differed
with Lenin on fundamental questions; that he was engaged in mustering cadres, so that they might be ready at his, Bukharin's,
first call to go into action against Lenin. This, in my opinion, was
the prelude to the formation of the Bukharin "school."
VYSHINSKY: How did Bukharin expect to take action against
Lenin? In what ways was he preparing to act?
IVANOV: He was in a fairly truculent mood. He was just waiting for a suitable moment. He wanted to have his own cadres.
VYSHINSKY: What for?
IVANOV: To remove Lenin.
VYSHINSKY: How to remove him?
IVANOV: Even by physical methods.
VYSHINSKY: And you talk about a school. Afine "school "I

ll7

IVANOV: It is known in the Party as the "school" of the "Left
Communists."
VYSHINSKY: And in reality it is not a "school," but a gang,
which Bukharin formed. Continue your account.
IVANOV: I referred to the Bukharin "school" by the term under which it is known.
VYSHINSKY: And in reality it is not a "school," but a gang.
And so your acquaintance with Bukharin is of old standing?
IVANOV: Our acquaintance was not interrupted until the moment of my arrest.
VYSHINSKY: I want to know, js your acquaintance with Bukharin of oId standing, or not?
IVANOV: It is of old standing.
VYSHINSKY: It dates from the group of the "Left Communists,,,. from the conspiratorial plans of 1918. Do I understand
you rightly?
IVANOV: That is so.
VYSHINSKY: Go on with your account.
IVANOV: The conversation I had with Bukharin in 1926 is
of interest. He bluntly said that we must prepare for an open fight
against the Party. Bear this in mind, he said, that we are coming
.out in public, and by doing so we are furnishing a program for the
consolidation of all the dissatisfied elements within the country.
But that, he said, is not the chief and fundamental thing; the chief
and fundamental thing is to work in secrecy for the recruitment of
cadres, for drawing the most influential members of the Party into
our net. By that time the feeling against the leadership of the Party
was becoming very acute.
VYSHINSKY: What next?
IVANOV: In 1928 I was sent to the North Caucasus as the Second Secretary. Bukharin suggested to me that I should form a
group of Rights in the North Caucasus. He added that the North
Caucasus would play a very important part in our struggle against
the Party and the Soviet power. He said that we must head a
corresponding peasant movement, especially that of the Cossacks, a movement against the Soviet power. We must make it
our task to transform the North Caucasus into a Russian Vendee.
You know, he said, that capitalism has now entered a new phase
of development, and at this new stage capitalism is displaying
fairly high elements of organization and planning. Capitalism, he
said, is revealing new and fresh strength, expressing itself in the progress of technique, which actually amounts to a technical revolution
and the rejuvenation of capitalism, as it were. And that, correspondingly, we must revise our view of the contradictions, of the
.classes, of the class struggle, and so on. Fundamental amendments
must be introduced to Marx. Marx's treatment of the question of
1.1.8

Rights to overthrow the Soviet power and about helping the
Rights to maintain the power seized, and that this agreement
provided for securing the interests of British timber firms with
timber of the Northern Territory. Bukharin proposed that the
sawmills should be handed over as a concession to the British,
while the new sawmills that had been built under the Soviet
power would have to be surrendered in payment of the tsarist
debts. Then, in 1934, he suggested that we must already begin to
make real payments in real values. He said that we must give
advances to the British bourgeoisie so as, on the one hand, not
to lose support, and, on the other, not to forfeit confidence. In
accordance with these instructions, the following measures were
carried out through Rosengoltz and Lobov.
The most valuable timber was sold at reduced prices. This
involved a loss to the Soviet state of several million rubles in
foreign currency. Bukharin explained this measure as being an
advance to the British bourgeoisie in return for the support it
had promised. Otherwise, he said, we would not be taken seriously,
and we would forfeit confidence.
VYSHINSKY: Credit?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Now tell us about terrorist activities and
terrorist plans.
IVANOV: Our organization in the Northern Territory was
set the task of forming a terrorist group.
VYSHINSKY: Whosetthistask?
IVANOV: Bukharin. Bukharin reverted to this subject several times, particularly after the assassination of Kirov. He
said that the shot fired at Kirov had shown that isolated terrorist
acts could yield no results, that mass terrorist acts must be organized, and only then would we have results. His line was to do away
with the leadership of the Party, and he argued as follows: if we
succeed in deing so before a war, the position will be clear, and it
is possible that immediate war on the Soviet Union will flare up.
If, for any reason, we were to fail to put the leadership of the Party
out of the way before a war, we were to do so during a war; and
this would cause great dismay, undermine the fighting efficiency
of the country and help radiccyly to bring about the defeat
of the Soviet power in a war with the imperialists. Bukharin
asked us to name the persons whom we had enlisted as terrorists.
We gave Bukharin the names of these people.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, the organizing of terrorist acts
also occupied a certain place in your criminal activities?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And this, you affirm, was done upon the direct
instructions . . .

122

IVANOV: Of Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: Only of Bukharin, or of others too?
IVANOV: Bukharin and Lobov.
VYSHINSKY: No, I mean among the accused in the present
trial.
IVANOV: No, nobody else gave instructions.
VYSHINSKY: And so you acted under the direct instructions
of Bukharin. In what year was that?
IVANOV: I first received instructions to organize a terrorist
group in 1934. Pressure was brought to bear in 1935, when it was
said that we were developing the work too slowly.
VYSHINSKY: What else have you to say about your wrecking
activities?
IVANOV: We also carried on insurrectionary activities.
VYSHINSKY: You have already spoken about that.
IVANOV: We assembled insurrectionary groups, chiefly around
Archangel, so as, at the moment of intervention, to cut off communication between Archangel and the central arteries of our
country, and thus make it easier for the British to seize this timber region and most valuable port.
Then we carried on diversive activities, chiefly in the timber
industry, because the Northern Territory is a timber region.
These activities aimed at preventing the technical re-equipment
of the timber industry, filling it with unreliable elements, wrecking the machinery centres and hampering timber-floating. In
1936, owing to the wrecking activities of our Right organization,
the Northern Territory failed to supply considerable quantities
of timber to the sawmills. This forced a number of the sawmills
to stop work and increased the shortage of timber material in
our country, thus severely affecting capital construction work in the
country.
When I was in the People's Commissariat of the Timber Industry I continued these wrecking activities and the preparations
for terrorist acts. Attention was chiefly devoted to hindering the
technical re-equipment of lumbering, preventing the fulfilment of
the plans of capital construction, especially in the cellulose and
paper industry, in this way placing the country on a short paper
ration and aiming a blow at the cultural revolution, interrupting
the supply of exercise books and thus rousing discontent among
the masses. We did everything we could to prevent the building of new plants ·and to hamper the work of the existing plants.
We also deliberately refrained from carrying out a number of
measures in the sphere of reconstruction which would have improved the work of the paper industry, ?nd thus prevented the
fulfilment of the program of paper output.

124

'That, I think, is all. Perhaps you have some questions to ask
me?
VYSHINSKY: And what circumstance terminated your criminal activities?
IVANOV: My arrest.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, right up to your arrest . . .
IVANOV: Right up to my arrest I continued to belong to
the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites and to carry on active undermining, espionage, terrorist, diversive and wrecking activities on
the instructions of the centre of the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions at present.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the defence any questions to ask?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE: (Reply in the negative.)
BUKHARIN: I have a question to put. I want to put it to
Citizen Ivanov. If I am not mistaken, the last time we met was
in March 1936.
IVANOV: In my opinion, we met also after that. At one of the
autumn plenums of the Central Committee of the Party you and
I had a conversation. What we talked about was the depression
that prevailed in the organization in connection with the victories
of the Party, the great vacillations, that people were beginning to desert, and that we did not possess big forces. I want to
recall the gist of the conversation, perhaps Bukharin will remember
it. You and I, Citizen Bukharin, played the hypocrite to the Soviet government so often that you could get the whole calendar
mixed up. I would remind you of the details of our conversation.
VYSHINSKY: The accused Bukharin asked you when you
and he last met.
IVANOV: I met him in 1937. In 1937 he had already adopted
a secretive attitude towards us.
VYSHINSKY: He had already adopted a secretive attitude
towards you?
IVANOV: Yes, from fear that he might get "pinched." Citizen Bukharin has said that our connections were interrupted
in March 1936. . . .
VYSHINSKY: He said nothing, he is only asking. You affirm
that until your arrest-in what month was that? When were you
arrested?
IVANOV: I was arrested after he was.
VYSHINSKY: That means that connections were not interrupted until his arrest?
IVANOV: They were not interrupted, but the meetings were
casual ones; they took place in such conditions that nobody could
have thought that we were arranging meetings with each other.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): Do you deny that you had meetings with Ivanov until the moment of your arrest?

125

BUKHARIN: No, 1 do not deny it, but I simply asked Ivanov to remind me when we met the last time, where we met, and
what we talked about.
IVANOV: We met several times during the course of 1936,
and in particular in December or in November 1936. I put it to
Bukharin that the organization was falling to pieces, that the
victories of the Party and the successes of Soc_ia list const~uc­
tion, and the enthusiasm of the masses for this construction,
were having such an effect that vacillations were growing at an
extraordinary pace, particularly in. the peripheral part, that our
assassination of Kirov had aroused the fury of the masses to an unprecedented degree, and that this was extremely hampering the
treacherous and vile work of the Rights, and that here and there
the masses themselves were exposing our followers. And I put it
to him whether it did not follow from the situation that had developed in the country that we had suffered complete bankruptcy.
VYSHINSKY: This is what you said to Bukharin?
IVANOV: Yes. And never did I see Bukharin as angry and
furious as he was then.
VYSHINSKY: When was that?
IVANOV: At the end of 1936. He attacked me violently, said
that I was a coward, a panic-monger, that I was always bringing
up the "masses," that we must not pander to the masses, that
I should know that the Right organization will wage war on the
masses, yet I wanted to pander to them.
VYSHINSKY: He wanted to wage war on the masses?
IVANOV: Yes. And he further put the question in this way:
if there are deserters, we must adopt much more extensive measures to exterminate those who decide to repent publicly before
the Soviet power, and thus expose our Right organization.
The fact is that there were instructions in the Right organization to the effect that those who deserted the Rights and
divulged their activities should be put out of the way. This was
done to one of our people who was about to write to the People's
Commissariat of Internal Affairs exposing the activities of the
Rights in the North Caucasus. Lobov told me that one of these
men had been put out of the way. And Bukharin plainly hinted
that I must bear in mind that they would not stand on ceremony
with anybody who funked or faltered, and that they had special
people to carry out the necessary measures 1 meaning assassination.
In 1937 our conversation was also a very brief one.
VYSHINSKY: A brief one?
IVANOV: Brief because we w&re already very cautious. The
whole organization was in a state of fear; I would say that the
activities of the Rights were virtually on the eve of thorough
126

exposure. During this cortversation in particular, t asked: where
is the intervention, where is the attack on the Soviet Union?
Bukharin told me that measures were being taken to induce the
fascist countries-japan and Germany-to take action without
fail in 1937, and the chances of this were good.
VYSHINSKY: No more questions?
BUKHARIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: You have no more questions?
BUKHARIN: I have not received a reply to the question
I put. I requested Ivanov to say, if he remembers everything
so thoroughly, in what months we met in 1937. If he does not
remember, let him say so.
THE PRESIDENT (to Ivanov): Reply briefly.
IVANOV: Why does Bukharin think that I must absolutely
remember all the months in which I had conversations with him?
I said that it was at the beginning of 1937. But it might have
been in January or February.
VYSHINSKY: You do not remember?
IVANOV: I do not remember precisely whether it was in
January or February, because we had so many conversations of
all kinds that you can't remember everything.
THE PRESIDENT (to Vyshinsky): Have you any more questions?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT (to Bukharin): Have you any more
questions?
BUKHARIN: No, I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: The Court will adjourn for twenty minutes.

*

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Be seated. Comrade Procurator, have you
anything to ask Ivanov?
VYSHINSKY: I would like to question Bukharin.
Accused Bukharin, the accused Ivanov said in this Court
that in 1928, or even somewhat earlier, he already had conversations with you on the subject of the anti-Soviet work of the
Right organization to which you belonged. Do you confirm this?
BUKHARIN: Yes. Permit me to say what I confirm ....
VYSHINSKY: I am interested only in that question. Do
you confirm it, or not?
BUKHARIN: Yes, .I .confirm it. Firstly, that I have been
acquainted with Ivanov since the time of the Brest-Litovsk Peace,
since 1918. During the Tenth Congress I really did advise Ivanov,
127

believing that he held counter-revolutionary opinions, to continue anti-Party work.
VYSHINSKY: What I am interested in knowing just now
is whether the accused Ivanov was right in saying that he had a
conversation with you in 1928 about anti-Soviet work. Do you
confirm that?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You consider that the accused Ivanov quite
rightly stated that in 1927-28, when he was leaving for the North
Caucasus, you gave him instructions?
BUKHARIN: It is perfectly true that when he was leaving
for the North Caucasus, I, on behalf of the Right centre, gave
him instructions regarding the recruitment of people and the formation of an organization there. Moreover, he had certain persons in mind, like Stepanov, Pivovarov, Tornachev and
others.
And it is perfectly true that in 1931-32, to use his jargon,
I passed him over to Lobov, who was to direct him.
Perfectly true is the assertion made by the accused Ivanov
to the effect that I kept him informed of the stand of the
Right centre, from the Ryutin platform to the latest stands, of
which the Court is ·fairly well informed.
It is quite true that I also met him later, in 1931-32, but
I cannot recall the dates just now.
VYSHINSKY: That we shall ask later. I once more repeat
that what interests me is 1928. Consequently, do you confirm
this part of the testimony of the accused Ivanov?
BUKHARIN: I confirm that I had meetings with him at
that time.
VYSHINSKY: And that you carried on those conversations
with him, as he informed the Court, about anti-Party and antiSoviet activities.
BUKHARIN: We did.
VYSHINSKY: The accused Ivanov testified that you proposed
that he should form an organization of Rights in the North Caucasus with certain definite aims. Do you confirm that too?
BUKHARIN: He has got the dates mixed up.
VYSHINSKY: First of all, do you confirm the fact itself?
BUKHARIN: I confirm the fact itself that I instructed him
to form an organization.
VYSHINSKY: A secret one?
BUKHARIN: A secret, illegal, counter-revolutionary one. But
at that period the acute struggle against the Party and the Soviet
government had not taken the forms . . .
VYSHINSKY: I am just now interested in the testimony
of the accused Ivanov, which the Court has heard. He says that
128

Bukharin gave me, i.e., Ivanov, instructions to proceed to form
a secret organization of Rights in the North Caucasus. Do you
<:onfirm this?
BUKHARIN: That part I do confirm.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, in 1928 you had adopted the
method of illegal, underground activities?
BUKHARIN: That was a moment of such transition . . .
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you when it was. Is this a
fact, or not a fact?
BUKHARIN: That I confirm.
VYSHINSKY: Did you also tell Ivanov at the time that a
<:entre of the Right organization was already functioning?
BUKHARIN: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Consisting of whom?
BUKHARIN: Consisting of three persons: Tomsky, Rykov,
and myself, Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: Did you tell him that this centre was preparing
for the overthrow of the Soviet power?
BUKHARIN: I did, but this refers to a later period.
VYSHINSKY: To which exactly?
BUKHARIN: I think it refers roughly to 1932-33.
VYSHINSKY: That is, somewhat later. But the fact that you
had such a conversation with Ivanov you do confirm?
BUKHARIN: I do. I do not remember the date, nor the month,
but that was the general orientation of the Right centre.
VYSHINSKY: And do you confirm that you said that you
were preparing for open battles?
BUKHARIN: There could have been no open battles in 1926.
When Ivanov says that we were preparing for open battles, he
is mixing the dates.
VYSHINSKY: But during the preliminary investigation you
said that it relates to 1926.
BUKHARIN: Yes, but not in the sense in which it is understood here, Citizen the State Prosecutor.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Please let me have Vol. V of
Bukharin's testimony, p. 113. Allow me to read it.
BUKHARIN: Excuse me, what page?
VYSHINSKY: Page 113 of Bukharin's testimony, Vol. V.
This is your testimony of December 25, 1937. Here, on p. 113,
it says: "I again established connections with Ivanov during
the Tenth Party Congress; I talked with him in the lobbies•...
In 1926-27, when we were preparing for open battles against the
Party, I advised Ivanov not to take part in the open attacks
on the Party on the grounds that Ivanov was a practical man, and
for the time being it was more expedient to keep him in reserve.,,
Do you confirm this?
9

129

BUKHARIN: Page 113 in my copy says something different.
VYSHINSKY: Is your signature there?
BUKHARIN: This is my signature, and the passage is perfectly correct. But I have a copy in which the page numbering is.
quite different.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, it is not a question
of the page numbering.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, did you tell Ivanov in
1926-27 that you, a group of Right conspirators, were preparing
for open battles against the Party?
BUKHARIN: Excuse me, but as a matter of fact I was referring to open actions and not to open battles.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, did the conversation which·
I have just quoted take place?
BUKHARIN: It did, but the words "open battles" did not
mean violent open battles.
VYSHINSKY: You speak of open battles, and that is what
you said in your conversation with Ivanov, too.
BUKHARIN: I was not referring to violent ...
VYSHINSKY: Did you say that Ivanov should be kept in.
reserve?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you say that Ivanov should not get involved!
in the open fight?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You did refer to open battles?
BUKHARIN: Ivanov has got his dates muddled.
VYSHINSKY: Excuse me, he has got nothing muddled. We·
can see that it is you who are muddling it.
·
BUKHARIN: We did not refer to open battles in the sense·
of armed insurrection.
VYSHINSKY: I am referring to open battles.
BUKHARIN: I misunderstood you, Citizen State Prosecutor.
VYSHINSKY: I beg your pardon, you misunderstood me,
Citizen Accused.
BUKHARIN: The incident is closed.
VYSHINSKY: Let us turn to your volume, p. 120. just look
for your testimony there.
BUKHARIN: I was arranging for this with Ivanov: "In.
1926-27, when we were preparing for open battles against the
Party, I advised Ivanov not to take part in the open battles, but
to remain in reserve." I do not deny that.
VYSHINSKY: Then in 1927 Ivanov went to the North Caucasus, and you gave him instructions. Do you confirm that? I ask
the question to check this. You gave him instructions to organize
an illegal Right group. Is that true?
130

BUKHARIN: It is.
VYSHINSKY: An illegal group?
BUKHP...RIN: An illegal one.
VYSHINSKY: This you confirm. You also instructed him
to carry out a number of tasks .you gave him with regard to this
organization in the period of 1928. It was not only a question
of recruiting, but also of the organization of insurrectionary bands?
BUKHARIN: I did not go into the technical side of this
business.
VYSHINSKY: I am not referring to the technical side of the
organization of insurrectionary bands, but to the platform of
the Rights, in which the line of insurrection was adopted. When
you instructed Ivanov to form an illegal organization, did you
say anything about insurrectionary bands?
BUKHARIN: I did not, and could not at that time.
VYSHINSKY: But what were the illegal organizations to do?
BUKHARIN: The illegal organizations were to muster forces
for the fight against the Party, which was growing acute.
VYSHINSKY: Only preparations for a fight?
BUKHARIN: It was such a stage in the general development
·
of the Right deviation.
VYSHINSKY: And when did you raise the question of insur:..
rectionary bands?
BUKHARIN: The adoption of violence roughly relates tq,
1932.
.
VYSHINSKY: Where was Ivanov at that time?
BUKHARIN: This I do not remember.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ivanov, where were you in 1932?
IVANOV: In 1932 I was in the Northern nrritory.
VYSH lNSKY: Was the question of organizing and formin:ginsurrectionary bands discussed by you, and if so, in what form?·
IVANOV: It was discussed. Bukharin bluntly put the question
of establishing connections with the discontented kulak elements.
of the Cossacks.
VYSHINSKY: This was not in the Northern Territory, but
in the North Caucasus?
IVANOV: Yes, in the North Caucasus.
VYSHINSKY: This refers not to 1932. Were you in the·
Northern Territory in 1932?
IVANOV: Yes, in 1932 I was in the Northern Territory.
VYSHINSKY: And was the question of preparing insurrectionary bands raised then?
IVANOV: The question of preparing insurrectionary bar:ids.
was also put before me by Bukharin in 1932, when the question._
9*

131

was raised of creating Right organizations in the Northern Territory.
VYSHINSKY: In 1932 did not Bukharin speak about the
necessity of strengthening insurrectionary bands?
IVANOV: He did.
VYSHINSKY: Hence you remember that you had two such
talks-in 1928 and in 1932?
IVANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In connection with your work in the North
Caucasus and in the Northern Territory?
IVANOV: Yes.
BUKHARIN (to the Court): I assert that in 1928 there was no
talk at all about an insurrectionary orientation, as is evidenced
by numerous documents and facts, including . . .
VYSH INSKY: But in 1929?
BUKHARIN: The fixation of the question about insurrectionary organizations that was approved by the Right centre was first
indicated in what is called the Ryutin platform.
VYSHINSKY: The Ryutin platform, its first variant, in
what period was that?
BUKHARIN: There was no variant at all. There was a preliminary conference, if I am not mistaken, in the spring of 1932
at which the theses were outlined. But in the platform which you
mention-the platform of 1928-29-there was no reference to
insurrection. . . .
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you assert that the question of insurrectionary bands was raised only in 1932?
BUKHARIN: The question of an insurrectionary orientation
ar.ose in 1932.
VYSHINSKY: The question of an "insurrectionary orientation." What is an "insurrectionary orientation"?
BUKHARIN: It means that every line has its strategy, tactics, organization, etc. An insurrectionary band is a category
of organization, but not a category of strategy, and not even
a category of tactics. In my terminology I usually distinguish
between them because it seems to me that they can be distinguished . . . .
VYSHINSKY: Of course; they can. But I ask: in your activities there was a line of insurrectionary movement. Is this what
you call an "insurrectionary orientation"?
BUKHARIN: Yes, tactics.
VYSHINSKY: And the organization of insurrectionary bands
followed from these tactics?
BUKHARIN: Yes, it did.
VYSHINSKY: And what did you do in this matter? What
instructions did you give?
132

BUKHARIN: I did not give Ivanov any instructions in this
sense.
VYSHINSKY: But Ivanov says that instructions were given.
BUKHARIN: Quite naturally, Ivanov says . . .
VYSHINSKY: Yes, Ivanov says this, and you assert that you
gave Ivanov no direct instructions, but that you had an "insurrectionary orientation."
BUKHARIN: It is quite natural that from this orientation
the practical worker should draw corresponding conclusions.
If I take such an orientation I am responsible for its conclusions
which are implied. So that from the point of view of criminal.
law I request you to' judge me for both the one and the other,
and I will answer . . .
VYSHINSKY: You will be judged without your request.
BUKHARIN: Quite right, without my request. I do not
think this is the time or place for witticisms. I too can be
witty. . . .
VYSHINSKY: I do not intend to be witty or to compete
with you in this. I only want to say that your request is of no
material importance, because you will be judged whether you
ask for it or not.
BUKHARIN: I am aware of this even without authoritative
explanations, Citizen Procurator.
VYSHINSKY: If you are aware of this there was no need for
you to mention it. I am asking you something else: Hence you admit
that Ivanov's evidence as regards the line, the orientation towards an insurrectionary movement, is correct?
BUKHARIN: Yes, Citizen Procurator.
VYSHINSKY: In what manner did you inform Ivanov
about your insurrectionary plans?
BUKHARIN: There were several conversations.
VYSHINSKY: What conversations, and with whom?
BUKHARIN: With Ivanov.
VYSHINSKY: What did you talk about? In what form?
BUKHARIN: I informed Ivanov exclusively on the form
of strategy and tactics.
VYSHINSKY: What is it if we say it without the words.
"strategy,. and "tactics"?
BUKHARIN: I said that a period had set in when it was.
necessary to adopt mass tactics, to support insurrectionary kulak
movements, etc.
VYSHINSKY: That is what I wanted to establish. You admit.
that you told Ivanov that it was necessary to support insurrectionary movements, every sort of kulak movement?
BUKHARIN: I admit it.
133

VYSHINSKY: Did you talk only about supporting, or also
about organizing them?
BUKHARIN: In such detail, Citizen Procurator, I did not
speak to him.· . . .
VYSHINSKY: How did you picture it to yourself?
BUKHARIN: Naturally, when it is said that it is expedient
to adopt these methods, then all the rest follows.
VYSHINSKY: That is?
. BUKHARIN: That is, organization and leadership.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, did you tell Ivanov that
upon him devolved the task, set by the Right centre, of organizing an insurrectionary movement?
BUKHARIN: He might have understood it in that way.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ivanov, did you understand it in
that way?
IVANOV: The instructions were conveyed to me in sufficiently clear terms to enable me to understand their simple meaning.
The point was raised that the kulaks were in an angry mood.
These were the social forces on which we were to rely. Our
task was to head the insurrection. And ev:en in regard to the
North Caucasus it was said, although in a somewhat different
version, that the North Caucasus could provide considerable
kulak cadres, that there the peasant and Cossack movement
might start earlier than in any other place, and therefore we
should take our place at the head of this movement.
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin, do you corroborate this?
BUKHARIN: This is correct, but not in relation to Ivanov.
1 said this to another person.
. VYSHINSKY: The other person we shall discuss separately.
What is important just now is whether the explanation given here
-coincides with the orientation towards insurrection, about which
you have spoken.
.
BUKHARIN: I could not have said this to Ivanov because
he was not in the North Caucasus· in 1932.
VYSHINSKY: Ivanov, what year were you referring to?
IVANOV: I was speaking of the Northern Territory, but
.at the same time I said that in a somewhat different version
this also applied to the North Caucasus.
VYSHINSKY: When did you leave the North Caucasus?
IVANOV: I left the North Caucasus on April 2 or 1, 1931.
VYSHINSKY: While you were in the North Caucasus when
<lid you speak with Bukharin?
IVANOV: In 1928.
VYSHINSKY: And in 1929-30?
IVANOV: I was meeting him, but I do not think we talked
.about these things.
134

VYSHINSKY: But was there any talk about insurrection in
1932?
IVANOV: Yes, there was such talk.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to sum up. judging by the evidence
-0f Ivanov and yours (to Bukharin), what can we regard as having
been definitely established? Firstly, that you and Ivanov talked
.about an insurrectionary line. Is that right?
BUKHARIN: That is right.
VYSHINSKY: That you orientated Ivanov towards the neces·sity of utilizing kulak insurrections in the interests of the struggle
.against the Soviet power?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: That you had in mind also the organization
-0f these kulak insurrections?
BUKHARIN: Although I did not speak about them directly.
VYSHINSKY: Although you did not speak about them directly,
nevertheless you orientated him towards them?
BUKHARIN: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: And you assert that all this occurred in 1932?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And in 1928 you only talked .about the illegal
group of the Rights?
BUKHARIN: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: The insurrectionary orientation was adopted
nevertheless but without the details that Ivanov has spoken about?
BUKHARIN: In 1932, yes.
VYSHINSKY: You deny the conversation about an insurrectionary orientation in 1928?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: But such a conversation took place in 1932?
BUKHARIN: Quite right. I corroborate this.
IVANOV: Permit me to put a question to Bukharin. Perhaps
Bukharin will exert his memory and recall whether we had a
.conversation in 1928 about the growing discontent among the
upper stratum of the rural population, and a.bout a tendency
towards a sharp expression of this discontent with the Soviet
power. Let him answer this question.
BUKHARIN: Of course, in 1928 a conversation about the
growing discontent did take place; I cannot deny it, because we
were meeting in 1928. But I categorically deny that I spoke
about insurrection in 1928.
.
IVANOV: Another question. Did Bukharin put it to me that
1in the carrying out of the line that was adopted by the Rights,
the North Caucasus was of exceptionally great importance, and
why it was of great importance?
135

BUKHARIN: It is quite true, Citizen Procurator and Citizens.
judges, that when I spoke about the North Caucasus I said that
the North Caucasus was one of the places where discontent among
the peasantry was manifesting itself and will manifest itself
most vividly, without, however, drawing any insurrectionary.
conclusions, because these arose at a much later period.
IVANOV: Bukharin said that an acute manifestation of
discontent among the peasantry in the North Caucasus was possible. This comes very close to what I said about this conversation.
In conformity with your conceptions did you not instruct me and
the Right organization to clutch at this discontent and to do.
everything to work up the peasants against the Soviet power?
BUKHARIN: First you spoke about insurrection, but I spoke
about the suitable social base for the Right organization, about
recruiting members for this Right counter-revolutionary organization.
VYSHINSKY: With what object?
BUKHARIN: With the object of creating mass bases for the
struggle against the Party line.
VYSHINSKY: Cossack, kulak circles for the struggle against
the Party line?
BUKHARIN: Well, what of it?
VYSHINSKY: For the struggle against the Soviet power?
BUKHARIN: The struggle against the Party line is a struggle
against the Soviet power.
VYSHINSKY: But the struggle against the Party line finds
expression in other forms.
BUKHARIN: I think that the Citizen Procurator, the Citizens
judges and the whole country are interested in seeing how out
of certain deviations monstrous conclusions are formed by the logic
of the struggle. That is why I want to preserve a certain time-proportion in this respect. In 1928 the anti-Party platform was formulated. At the end of 1928 and the transition to 1929 the slogan
was issued to form an illegal organization. In the course of the
further intensification of the struggle all this led to what you know.
VYSHINSKY: The question is, did you not orientate Ivanov
on the grounds that in your opinion there was favourable soil in
the North Caucasus for insurrection against the Soviet power?
BUKHARIN: There was no talk about such an orientation at
that time. The orientation was that there was soil there for growing
discontent with the Soviet power.
VYSHINSKY: On whose part?
BUKHARIN: On the part of the kulak well-to-do strata of the
peasantry, and partly also of the middle strata of the peasantry,.
as the middle peasantry there was very strong.
VYSHINSKY: Can we not draw from this the conclusion that
136

you orientated Ivanov towards underground counter-revolutionary
work in which he would rely upon this kulak upper stratum in the
struggle against the Soviet power?
BUKHARIN: At that time it was possible to formulate it in
this way: every social base, in this case the kulak base, chemically
produces within the Party not altogether sound elements, i.e .•
there it is easier to recruit for the illegal counter-revolutionary
organization, even within the Party, people who would represent
a certain potential force in the future. But this prospect was not
fully developed at the time.
VYSHINSKY: But it was already outlined?
BUKHARIN: Potentially, in an embryonic form.
VYSHINSKY: Apart from this, you have no disagreements.
with Ivanov?
BUKHARIN: There are no important disagreements.
VYSHINSKY: Ivanov states that he learnt from you of the
existence of a bloc between the Trotskyites, the Right groups and
the nationalist groups. Do you corroborate this?
BUKHARIN: I do.
VYSHINSKY: And did you know about the negotiations which
Ivanov and others carried on with capitalist countries?
BUKHARIN: Yes, this was at a much later period.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, Ivanov's statements about connections
with the British Intelligence Service ...
BUKHARIN: I was totally uninformed about the Intelligence
Service and about plans.
VYSHINSKY: What were you informed about?
BUKHARIN: I informed Ivanov of the foreign-political orientation of the Right centre, I told him that in the fight against the
Soviet power it was permissible to take advantage of a war situation, and a number of other things.
In short, as one of the leaders of the Right centre, it was my
duty to communicate our line to one of the leaders of the periphery
centre. What was this line? Briefly, this line was that in the fight
against the Soviet power it is permissible to utilize a war situation and to make certain concessions to capitalist states for
the purpose of neutralizing them, and sometimes for the purposeof obtaining their assistance.
VYSH IN SKY: In other words, orientation towards assistance
from certain foreign states.
BUKHARIN: Yes, it can be put that way.
VYSHINSKY: In other words, orientation towards the defeat
of the U.S.S.R.
BUKHARIN: In general, ·summarized, I repeat, yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Are there any more questions?
VYSHINSKY: No.

131

BUKHARIN: Perhaps you will permit me, Citizen President,

to say a few words reg1rding excursions into theory.
THE PRESIDENT: No. You may do so when you are examined.
We will now proceed to examine the accused Zubarev.
Accused Zubarev, do you corroborate the testimony you gave
<luring the investigation in the People's Commissariat of Internal
Affairs and in the organs of the Procuratorship?
ZUBAREV: Yes, I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Fully?
ZUBAREV: I fully corroborate it.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any questions?
VYSHINSKY: Accused Zubarev, when did you take the path
Qf criminal activities in the counter-revolutionary organization
Qf the Rights?
ZUBAREV: I was enlisted in the counter-revolutionary organization of the Rights in 1929.
VYSHINSKY: And since then?
ZUBAREV: And since then I carried on active work up to the
day of my arrest.
VYSHINSKY: What was the active criminal work which you
<:onti nued up to the day of your arrest?
ZUBAREV: In 1929, I was enlisted in the organization of the
Rights by Alexander Petrovich Smirnov, with whom I had been
acquainted since 1919. On meeting him in the beginning of 1928
I expressed my dissatisfaction and disagreement with the Party
line in respect to the policy in the rural districts. He entirely supported my opinion and strengthened me in it. Knowing my counterrevolutionary views, he in 1929, in May or June, in Moscow, gave
me a detailed description of the political state of the country, of the
growing discontent in the rural districts owing to the grain collections and to the employment of extraordinary measures against the
kulak upper stratum of the rural population, owing to the restriction of the private initiative of the rural population and the decline
:and diminution in sown area, particularly in the extensive farming districts, the Urals in particular. He developed the point
Qf view that it would be impossible for the Rights to change this
state of things by internal Party methods, and that the only path left
was that of struggle against the Soviet power. He then informed
me of the existence of the Right organization, and I learnt for
the first time in 1929 that he was a member of this organization.
It was then also that I first learnt of the existence of a Union
centre of this organization.
Then he went on to say that the Rights attached great importance
to the Urals, that the Urals were important for two reasons (I am
speaking not of the present Urals Region, but of the former Urals
138

R~gion,_ which _inc!uded the present Chelyabinsk Region, so that
this region, which is not only a very important industrial district,
but also a very important agricultural district, comprised the whole
of the eastern part of the Urals); that as regards industry and agriculture, the Urals were extremely important in this respect, and
that they (and he in particular) counted on my participation in
counter-revolutionary work.
When I consented he at once told me that I would not be the
only one working in the Urals, that there was already an active
member of the counter-revolutionary organization there, very
influential, that he was already directly connected with the Union
centre through Rykov. He mentioned Kabakov.
VYSHINSKY: When did the connections with Rykov begin?
ZUBAREV: Connections with Rykov began in 1930, when he
came to the Party conference in Sverdlovsk.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances did the connection
arise between you and Rykov as the leader of the Right conspiratorial centre?
ZUBAREV: I was then on Party work. During the conference
I had quite a long talk with Rykov.
VYSl-IINSKY: What about?
ZUBAREV: Rykov referred to A. P. Smirnov and stated that
he had heard from him that I was an active member of the Right
organization. I described to him the general situation in the Urals,
the state of our organization and told him that already at the end
of 1929, in December, Kabakov and I had organized a regional
leading group which co-ordinated the whole work. I told him who
belonged to this group: Kabakov, myself, Sovetnikov and others.
I told him of the work I had done on Smirnov's instructions and
on his, Rykov's, instructions, conveyed by Kab1kov.
The work at that time in the main consisted of preparing
cadres, of uniting the scattered forces we then had in the organization. Rykov approved of this work, and he in turn gave me a
aetailed description of the state of the country at the time, that
is, in the spring of 1930, when the situation was extremely tense
in the rural districts, in the period of the class struggle that
followed in connection with mass collectivization and the policy
of expropriating the kulaks.
'
He characterized the situation as extremely strained and said
that, owing to mass collectivization, the expropriation, of the
kulaks and the employment of administrative measures, spontaneous
armed risings were breaking out in a number of districts; that the
policy of expropriating the kulaks had affected not only the kulak
upper stratum but sometimes also certain well-to-do middle strata
of the rural population, and that this great drama in the rural
districts had also created a hostile attitude towards the Party's

139

policy. He said there and then that the Party was responsible for
this mess and would have to clean it up itself, and as faras we were
concerned, the worse, the better. Rykov said that it would be ridiculous on our part if we did not wage our struggle to bring about this
kulak insurrection, if we ourselves took absolutely no measures
to organize such a kulak movement and did not take the lead of it.
Rykov said that first of all we should take advantage of these
factors to fan discontent in the rural districts. The tasks which
Rykov then put before me during this conversation can be reduced
to three main points.
The first was wrecking work in the rural districts: disruption
of the sowing campaign by delaying the issue and supply of
seeds, reducing their quality, which would naturally rouse anger
among the population. On the other hand, measures that hindered
the strengthening of the collective farms were adopted in order
to rouse discontent among the peasant population.
As regards industry, no definite tasks were put as regards wrecking; at least, no direct and definite instructions were given.
In addition, we were to create and consolidate cadres in largescale industry and to entrench ourselves in its most important
branches in the Urals, and not to scatter our forces in this work;
industry was too varied, and so we were to concentrate our work
on the most important branches of industry, and in the most important plants.
The second point. This was to excite the population by various
provocative measures, by disorganizing the supply of staple food
products, and particularly disorganizing public catering. This was
done in a number of places in 1932, particularly in Perm, Lisva,
and, as far as I know, in Berezniki in the Kizel district.
The third point. The consolidation of all the elements hostile
to the Soviet power and the formation of a bloc with the other
organizations in the Urals. In particular, in respect to the Trotskyites, Zinovievites, Socialist-Revolutionaries, it was impressed
upon us that we were to get in touch with them and organize connections and contact without losing our independence.
This, in substance, is the line which I received. I learnt from
Kabakov that he had had separately conversations, rather lengthy
ones, with Rykov in his railway car at the same time, and the contents, the substance of their conversations I learnt from Kabakov
himself, who told me about them. The substance of their conversations amounted to the same as what I have just stated.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to question the accused
Rykov.
Accused Rykov, what have you to say about this part of the
accused Zubarev's evidence? Do you corroborate the statement
about the meeting?
140

RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And the conversations, instructions?
RYKOV: I corroborate the talks about my opinions concerning
the temper prevailing in the rural districts at that time. I also
had to give and gave instructions. But the main thing here are
the conclusions. In respect to the conclusions tlie main position
on wrecking ...
VYSHINSKY: First about the facts, and then about conclusions. Did you give Zubarev any instructions?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: When?
RYKOV: In May 1930.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you gave instructions secretly to recruit
members for the organization of the Rights?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You corroborate this?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Do you want to clear up any points on subsequent instructions that you gave Zubarev in respect to his criminal activities?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In the main, what he said is right?
RYKOV: In the main it can be said he is right. In respect to the
rural districts, I spoke about-expressing myself in our languagesabotaging the policy of the Party in the rural districts in respect
to collectivization and supporting individual farming in the rural districts.
VYSHINSKY: You gave the line to sabotage the government's
measures in respect to collectivization, to disrupt collectivization. . . .
.
RYKOV: And to support individual peasant farming.
VYSHINSKY: For the purpose of disrupting collectivization?
RYKOV: The one excluded the other.
VYSHINSKY: Did you give any line on sabotaging the
Party's policy?
RYKOV: Well, of course, and the Party's policy in the rural
districts in general.
VYSHINSKY: You corroborate this?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated. (To the Court.} Permit me to question the accused Zubarev.
Accused Zubarev, tell us what you did concretely to commit
crimes against the Soviet government.
ZUBAREV: In the sphere of agriculture we had at the head
members of our . . .
VYSHINSKY: It is not important for me what members
141

of your organization you will name. What is important for me
is what you, Zubarev, did in committing crimes against the Soviet
government.
ZUBAREV: I gave instructions in the sphere of agriculture
to disrupt grain collections, to encourage hostile moods in connection with grain deliveries, to resist collectivization, to resist the
measures the Party and the government were carrying out fo
strengthen the collective farms.
VYSHINSKY: This was in what year?
, __
ZUBAREV: I gave these instructions when rwas in the Urals
~..,... ..
in 1931.
VYSHINSKY: And did you give any instructions to organize·
kulak insurrections?
ZUBAREV: I did. They were direct corollaries of these measures.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us what you remember of this part.
ZUBAREV: What we did in respect to kulak insurrections and
in the sphere of organizational measures? We set up organizational groups in the periphery. Of course, at that time there
was nothing else of a definite nature that we coutd do.
VYSHINSKY: With what object?
ZUBAREV: With the object of being ready at the proper moment to lead such insurnctions and insurrectionary movements.
VYSHINSKY: Did you do this on your own initiative or not?
ZUBAREV: I carried out the instructions I had received from
Smirnov and Rykov. Kabakov, who all the time maintained direct
connections with Rykov and Tomsky, also had this line.
VYSHINSKY: And then in 1932 and 1933?
ZUBAREV: I must say that in 1931, towards the end of the
year, I went to Moscow, but I learnt of a number of measures that
were being carried out in the Urals from members of the Urals
organization whom I met in Moscow. I did not directly give instructions myself. I left at the end of September and did not return
to the Urals, and my connections were maintained only by meeting
individual members of the organization. But I knew about the
wrecking work that was going on in industry and about the connections the Urals organization had with the Trotskyites and Socialist-Revolutionaries.
VYSHINSKY: When was that?
ZUBAREV: In 1932, 1933 and 1934. I knew this from a number of members, and directly from Kabakov.
VYSHINSKY: What wrecking acts were committed as a result
of your activities?
ZUBAREV: I gave wrecking instructions which caused damage
to the Soviet state in the sphere of agriculture in the Ura ls. As
for my work in Moscow, my counter-revolutionary activities here
started in the middle of 1933.
142

VYSHINSKY: Tell us the nature of your wrecking activitiesZUBAREV: When I was working in the seed cultivation department of the People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the
U.S.S.R., they were of the nature that the accused Chernov spoke
about yesterday: causing confusion in seed cultivation, lowering
the quality of the seeds, employing bad quality materials, bad
sifting, careless storing, and the result of all this was not only
a reduction in yield, but also a hostile mood of the peasantry,
dissatisfaction with these so-called sekcted seeds.
VYSHINSKY: During what period did you commit these crimes?·
ZUBAREV: They were committed at the end of 1933 and the
beginning of 1934.
VYSHINSKY: And then?
ZUBAREV: And then in March 1934 I left the People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the U.S.S.R. and went to the People's
Commissariat of Agriculture of the R.S.F .S. R. There was our organization in the People'sCommissariat of Agriculture of the R.S.F.S.R.
and I was able to establish connections with this organization
through Muralov, as Muralov, while being a member of this organization, had for a long time been People's Commissar of Agriculture of the R.S.F.S.R., and his Assistant Commissar was Lisitsin.
I knew from Muralov that Lisitsin too was a member of our organization.
VYSHINSKY: What was the nature of your criminal activities
in the People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the R.S. F.S. R.?·
ZUBAREV: Here my criminal activities consisted first of
all in wrongly planning the sowing of vegetables; in particular,
little attention was paid to the development of vegetable growingin our eastern districts, where the development of vegetable growingwas of enormous importance, especially in view of the development of industry, in particular in the Far Eastern Territory and
in the West Siberian Territory. The shipping of vegetatles from
the principal vegetable-growing districts in Central Russia was
economically extremely difficult and loaded the railways with a
very unprofitable freight-this was the first point. Secondly, exc:ctly
the same kind of work was carried on in respect to retarding the
development of fruit-tree nurseries. Fruit growirg had recently
begun to develop very rapidly and the collective farm population
was beginning to present a growing demand owing to their increased
prosperity, but we were unable to meet this d€mand.1he dEvelopment of nurseries was also retarded as one of the wncking measures.
In respect to state farms, the main wncking activities were
that up to the last moment no proper rotation of crops was established, and in a number of state farms there was no rotation of crop&
at all. All this naturally reduced the yields. A large number of
state farms which possessed large herds of cattle were left without
143

fodder owing to the wrong crop rotation, and as a result we
had the dying off of cattle and slow development of the
livestockfarming. Why do I speakonlyof thiscompass of measures?
Because in the People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the
R.S.F.S.R. the compass of our measures was extremely limited, as
the principal activities were concentrated in the People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the U.S.S.R.
VYSHINSKY: Did you know that the program of this centre
and of the whole group of the bloc of Rights and Trotskyites inducted terrorist acts?
ZUBAREV: Yes, I did know.
VYSHINSKY: So you knew. Were you personally engaged in
.organizing terrorist acts?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: When and against whom?
ZUBAREV: At the end of 1936, approximately in December,
we-Lisitsin and I-received instructions to organiz~ a terrorist
group in the People's Commissariat of Agriculture of the R.S. F.S. R.
This group consisted of . . .
VYSHINSKY: Who belonged to it is not important just now.
Did you be long to this group?
ZUBAREV: Yes, I belonged to it.
VYSHINSKY: Did you organize this group?
ZUBAREV: I was one of its members and 0ne of its organizers.
VYSHINSKY: Against whom did you intend to commit your
dastardly terrorist acts?
ZUBAREV: At first we had no definite persons in mind, but
generally we intended to commit terrorist acts against the leading
members of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. (Bolsheviks),
in particular, against the members of the Political Bureau. In view
of our position, in view of our connections and great possibilities
for organizing terronst acts, our choice fell on Molotov.
VYSHINSKY: On Molotov-the Chairman of the Council of
People's Commissars of the U.S.S.R.?
ZUBAREV: Yes, on Molotov.
VYSHINSKY: And did you have any other criminal designs
-0f the same kind?
ZUBAREV: We confined ourselves to that. We saw no other
possibilities. At first the question was raised about Stalin,
Kaganovich, Voroshilov and Molotov, but we limited ourselves
to Molotov for the reasons I have just stated.
VYSH INS KY: That is, for technical reasons?
ZUBAREV: For technical reasons, and according to our possibilities.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us under what circumstances you became
.an agent of the tsarist Okhrana.
144

ZUBAREV: Not the Okhrana, but the tsarist police.
VYSHINSKY: Is there any difference?
ZUBAREV: There is a slight difference, but in substance
they are the same.
VYSHINSKY: I think so too.
ZUBAREV: In 1908, in the village where my father lived,
and where I was staying at the time, a large force of police arriv€d
to make a search. During the search a considerable quantity of
literature was found.
VYSHINSKY: Of what sort?
ZUBAREV: Illegal literature. Inspector Vasilyev, who was
in charge of the search, put it to me like this: "If you, Zubarev,
want to escape punishment, the only way you can do so is to
accept my proposal that you become an agent of the police."
I did not immediately give him a definite reply but said that if
I decided to accept I wo.uld call upon him.
Some time later I called on him in his apartment in the town
of Kotelnich and received from him instructions to provide him
with information on the membership of the Kotelnich organization, on the character of some of its most active leaders-Chibisov, Petukhov and Popov-and with information about the
match factory and the military garrison. This was in DecemberNovember 1908. In March I called upon him a second time and
then I left the Vyatka Province and went to the Ufa Province,
where I obtained a· situation as a bookkeeper in a co-operative
society in the district town. At first I had no occasion to meet the
police, but in the middle of 1910 I established connections with the
police inspector of Sterlitamak.
VYSHINSKY: What sort of connections?
ZUBAREV: As an agent.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, you became an agent of the
police in Sterlitamak?
ZUBAREV: Yes. Inspector Vasilyev told me that he had sent
notification to my new place of residence. That is when my work
started, and I was given the pseudonym of "Paren.~'
VYSHINSKY: This was your second pseudonym?
ZUBAREV: Yes. My first was "Va5ily."
VYSHINSKY: Did you have another pseudonym?
ZUBAREV: In Ufa my pseudonym was "Prokhor.
VYSHINSKY: When was this?
ZUBAREV: In the beginning of 1916.
VYSHINSKY: What other occupation did you then have,
apart from your work as an agent-provocateur? What was your
official position?
ZUBAREV: I was working in the town of Sterlitamak as
the district co-operative instructor.
10

145

VYSHINSKY: Whom did you betray?
ZUBAREV: The members of the staff of the Co-operative
Society and of the Zemstvo. In Sterlitamak I was instructed to·
give information about the political exiles, of whom there was a
large number in Sterlitamak.
VYSHINSKY: You gave information about the political
exiles?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you give information about the Bolshevik
exiles?
ZUBAREV: There was one Social-Democrat there, the agronomist Si lin, and one other Social-Democrat whose name I cannot now recall.
VYSHlNSKY: So you find it hard to remember all those
you betrayed?
ZUBAREV: At atl events, since I do not deny the fact itself ..•
VYSHINSKY: Well, I say that you cannot remember them
all. And so at the end of 1915 or beginning of 1916 you moved
to Ufa?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances? What drew you
to Ufa?
ZUBAREV: The Provincial Zemstvo offered me the post of
provincial co-operative instructor. I went to Ufa, and six weeks
later I was mobilized • . . .
VYSHINSKY: When you arrived in Ufa you resumed your
connections with the police?
ZUBAREV: Yes, at the beginning of February 1916.
VYSHINSKY: And it was then that you were given the pseudonym of "Prokhor"?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And then you were called up for the army?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And while you were in the army did you continue to inform the police on political matters?
ZUBAREV: After my departure from Ufa, no.
VYSHINSKY: l ask when you were in the army. . . .
ZUBAREV: At all events, this business depressed me very
much, for my becoming an agent of the tsarist Okhrana was
not called forth by any natural organic vice.
VYSHINSKY: By inorganic vice?
ZUBAREV: I want to say that I . . .
VYSHINSKY: Whether it was called forth by ;organic vice
or inorganic vice we shall ascertain later.
And so yt>u established connections with the police in 1908?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
146

VYSHINSKY: These connections continued for a number of
years. Then you found yourself in Sterlitamak, and here you also
established connections with the police because Inspector Vasilyev
had informed the district where you lived about you. In 1910
you lived in Sterlitamak, and you also lived there in 1911.
ZUBAREV: I lived there until 1914.
'
VYSH INS KY: During all this time you maintained connections with the police?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Thus in 1910, 1911, 1912, 1913, 1914 and part
of 1915·you were connected with the police, while living in Sterlitamak.
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSH INSKY: Then you moved to Ufa and again established
connections with the police. After that you were called up to
the army. While you were in the army, did you give the police
information about revolutionary sentiments in the army?
ZUBAREV: I received instructions to report the political
sentiments of the military unit to which I belonged.
VYSHINSKY: Did you do that?
ZUBAREV: Yes, I did it once, and .then I left Ufa.
VYSHINSKY: You had no further occasion to do so?
ZUBAREV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Thus, you were connected with the police for
a long period of time, right up to the revolution?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you receive any remuneration for this
work?
ZUBAREV: On two occasions Inspector Vasilyev gave m~
thirty rubles.
VYSHINSKY: Thirty pieces of silver on each occasion?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSH INSKY: ·Twice as much as Judas received?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you engaged in espionage activities?
ZUBAREV: I forgot to mention this.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you'engaged in espionage activities?
.
ZUBAREV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Tell us about your espionage activities.
ZUBAREV: My espionage activities began at the end of 1935,
I was drawn into this organization for supplying secret information
by Sulimov's secretary, Ivanov. I supplied secret information
about agriculture on two occasions-in January and December
1936. I gave details about the ·state of the rural districts, grain
IO*

147

reserv.es, seed and food stocks, particularly fodder, and reported
on the condition of the cattle. I learnt from Ivanov that this
~nformation was given for the benefit of fascist Germany. Who
definitely maintained the connections, I, for quite understandable reasons, was not informed, and I do not know.
VYSHINSKY: I req'uest that Inspector Vasilyev, who enlisted Zubarev, be called as· a witness in order to verify this circumstance.
THE PRESIDENT (to Zubarev): Sit down for the time being.
The Court has decided to grant ihe Procurator's request and
to call Vasilyev into Court in the capacity of witness.
VYSHINSKY: I ask permission to interrogate him immediately. I have arranged for him to be called, but he is outside the
Court room.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Commandant, lead in the witness Vasilyev.
(The Commandant leads in Vasilyev.)
Is your name Vasilyev?
VASILYEV: It is.
THE PRESIDENT: What is your name and patronymic?
VASILYEV: Dmitry Nikolayevich.
THE PRESIDENT: When were you born?
VASILYEV: In 1870.
. THE PRESIDENT: In which towns did you live in 1907,
1908, 1909 and 1910?
VASIL YEV: In the town of Kotelnich.
THE PRESIDENT: What position did you occupy?
VASIL YEV: I was District Inspector of District No. 4.
THE PRESIDENT: From what year and until what year
were you inspector?
VASILYEV: From 1906 to 1917.
THE PRESIDENT: During the period you were inspector
did you enlist anyone as an agent-provocateur?
VASILYEV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: In particular, did you enlist Zubarev?
VASILYEV: Zubarev, yes sir.
THE PRESIDENT: Tell us in a few words how you did
this.
VASIL YEV: The police inspector in the Smerdinsk Districtin the village where Prokopy Timofeyevich Zubarev lived-reported to me th.at young people gathered in his father's house,
sang revolutionary songs and read revolutionary literature.
Well, I, of course, in the performance of my duties, went to the
village with rural inspector Konev, searched the place, and indeed found a large number of revolutionary publications. I took
the latter away and, of course, I had to arrest Zubarev. In my
148

office Zubarev told me that there were some more revolutionaryminded people in the village and named two persons, although
he did not tell me their surnames, and said that he would point
them out. I reported this to the Chief Inspector. The inspector
instructed me to enlist him and to get a signed pledge from him.
THE PRESIDENT: What was the nature of this pledge?
VASIL YEV: To the effect that he undertook to supply the
police with information. In making the pledge he said that his
pseudonym would be "Vasily."
THE PRESIDENT: Did he say it?
VASIL YEV: Yes, he said it. I remember it very well.
THE PRESIDENT: And did he speak about money?
VASILYEV: After .that he spoke about money.
THE PRESIDENT: What pay was fixed?
VAS IL YEV: The inspector sent him thirty rubles.
THE PRESIDENT: Did you ever give him any more money?
VAS IL YEV: I distinctly remember one occasion, but I may
have given him more, I do not deny it. ·
·
VYSHINSKY: How long were you connect~d with Zubarev?
VASILYEV: From 1908 to 1909.
VYSHINSKY: About how long?
VASILYEV: About a year.
VYSHINSKY: Over a year?
VASILYEV: Yes. I established connections at the beginning
of 1908, and at the beginning of 1909 he left the Kotelnich
District.
·
VYSHINSKY: And did you know his family?
VASILYEV: No, I did not. I was in charge of'six volosts and
had to look after a lot of people.
·
·
VYSHINSKY: How is it that you remember him so well?
Much time has elapsed since then, and yet you remember this
Zubarev so well.
VASILYEV: I just remember.
.
VYSHINSKY: You remember him through your work at that
time?
VASILYEV: That is so.
VYSHINSKY: Did he meet yeu again?
VASILYEV: I have not set eyes on him since 1909. He was
a young man then, and now he is no doubt a middle-aged man.
VYSHINSKY: I should think so! You were younger then too·.
(To the President.) May I question Zubarev?
THE PRESIDENT~ Accused Zubarev.
VYSHINSKY: Do you remember, is this the Vasilyev wh0
-was the inspector at that time?
ZUBAREV: Thirty years have elapsed· si1nce .tnen ·and it is

!49

hard for me to remember, but I think that is the man .... I do not
deny it.
VYSHINSKY: Does he resemble him?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: He was younger then?
ZUBAREV: Of course.
VYSH INS KY: Did you receive the money from Vasi lyev,
or from some other person? And to whom did you give the information?
ZUBAREV: Yes, I received the money from Vasilyev and
gave the information to Vasilyev.
VYSHINSKY: How many times, do you remember?
ZUBAREV:. I went to see him twice.
VYSHINSKY: Where did lie live then?
ZUBAREV: In Kotelnich.
VYSHINSKY: And you reported to him in Kotelnich?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And where were you arrested?
ZUBAREV: I was not arrested then.
VYSHINSKY: But he took you in custody with the literature?
ZUBAREV: Yes, but he put such terms to me ...
VYSHINSKY: Was a search made in your house?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Was illegal literature found in your house?
ZUBAREV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And you were taken in custody because of
this?
ZUBAREV: Yes, I was taken in custody, but the following
terms were proposed, that if I gave information . _ .
VYSHINSKY: Then he made you sign a pledge?
ZUBAREV: I do not remember now, but I think it was so.
VYSH INS KY: ·But you clearly remember this fact?
ZUBAREV: Yes. Later on I left Kotelnich and sent information to Sterlitamak.
VYSHINSKY: Did you yourself choose the pseudonym of
"Vasily"?
ZUBAREV: I do not remember whether I adopted it myself,
or whether he proposed it; I do not remember. and I would not
deny that he gave it to me, or that I chose it myself, but the fact
occurred.
VYSHINSKY: Do you affirm that the witness Dmii.ry Nikolayevich Vasilyev recalls to your mind Inspector Vasilyev, who
enlisted you in the service of the police?
ZUBAREV: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
150

VYSHINSKY: Pardon me.·We do everything in order here . . . .
KRESTINSKY: Perhaps I can shorten your labours.
VYSH INS KY: I have no need to have them shortened, all the
more since the statements you made yesterday do not testify to
a desire on your part to shorten the trial.
KRESTTNSKY: But perhaps I . . .
THE PRESIDENT: Your turn will come, accused Krestinsky.
VYSHINSKY: I would ask you, accused Rakovsky, to tell us
what the accused Krestinsky wrote to you in 1929 while you were
living in exile in Saratov.
RAKOVSKY: Krestinsky wrote in that letter that I should
return to the Party, naturally with the object of continuing Trot·skyite activities.
VYSH INS KY: What for?
RAKOVSKY: He wrote nothing in the letter that was obvi·-0usly unlawful.
VYSHINSKY: And so you are now establishing the fact that
lle maintained connections with you, although you were an exiled
Trotskyite?
RAKOVSKY: Yes, as well as his desire, as that of other Trot·skyites, to preserve the Trotskyite cadres, as far as possible, by
penetrating into the Party.
VYSHINSKY: That is, he tried to persuade you, from tactical
motives, and in the Trotskyite interests, to return to the Party?
RAKOVSKY: That is how I understood it.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to put a question to the accused Kre-stinsky.
Accused Krestinsky, did the accused Rakovsky understand the
contents of. your letter properly?
KRESTINSKY: He did.
VYSHINSKY: I have to make the following request of the
-Court. The documents taken from Krestinsky during the
search have at my request now been examined. Among
them was a copy of his letter to Trotsky dated November 27,
1927, the very letter to which Krestinsky referred yesterday, and
<>f which Rakovsky is speaking.
I request to be allowed to hand this copy of the letter to Rakovsky and Krestinsky and to ask them whether it is to this letter
io Trotsky they are both referring; after which I request to be allowed to put a few more questions.
(The copy of the letter of November 27, 1927, is handed to Krestinsky and then to Rakovsky.)
KRESTINSKY: That is the letter.
VYSHINSKY: Please hand the copy of this letter to the accused
Rakovsky.
155

1

RAKOVSKY: The author of the letter remembers it better than
I do.
VYSHINSKY: It will only take a couple of minutes, but the
fact will be established.
RAKOVSKY (reads the letter): Yes, as far as I remember, this
is the letter.
VYSHINSKY: ! ask that Rakovsky be handed an excerpt from
the newspaper "Ekonomicheskaya Zhizn" of April 8, 1928, which
carries the heading: "Excerpt from Krestinsky's Letter of March
22, 1928." Is this what he was referring to when he spoke of
the letter Kresti nsky sent to the Centi:a I Committee after he had
sent his letter to Trotsky?
RAKOVSKY: Yes, this is what I was referring to.
VYSHINSKY: And so, all the facts have been established.
RAKOVSKY: I read this in the "Pravda" or the "Izvestia,"
but it might have been published in all the newspapers.
KRESTINSKY: This was on April 8.
VYSHINSKY: But the letter is dated March 22?
KRESTINSKY: I do not remember the date of the letter.
RAKOVSKY: I remember that there were two letters sent by
Trotskyite Ambassadors: Antonov-Ovseyenko an.d Krestinsky.
VYSHINSKY: And so all the facts have been established. 0(}
you not remember, accused Rakovsky, that the letter to which
ysu just referred began just like the copy of this letter-"Dear
Lev Davidov1ch"?
RAKOVSKY: That was the usual form.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rakovsky, do you remember the following passage from Krestinsky's personal letter to Trotsky, as it is
expressed in the copy? Krestinsky writes: "It is my profound conviction that the tactics of the opposition during the past half-year
have been profoundly erroneous and detrimental to the aims of
the opposition itself, and one might say tragically wrong."
May one draw the conclusion from this paragraph that there is
any condemnation of Trotskyism here?
RAKOVSKY: No. Krestinsky is arguing like a man who belongs to the Trotskyite organization. He proceeds from Trotskyite
premises. He speaks in the interests of the Trotskyite organization
and the Trotskyite aims. This is just what he declared in Berlin.
as I have already" said.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, all that we have here is a simple
estimate of the tactical line of the Trotskyites given by a man,
in this case Krestinsky, who adheres to the ground of the Trotskyite
struggle against the Soviet power?
RAKOVSKY: Yes, that is so.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to questfon Krestinsky. Would it
be correct so to interpret this passage from the letter to Trotsky?

156

KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: The copy of this letter further says:
"It is absurd to talk of preserving cadres when they have already been virtually destroyed by the incorrect policy of the opposition itself. After all, you cannot regard a couple of hundred
<:omrades who have been expelled and outlawed as cadres. These
.are cadres for prison and exile, and not for the continuation of
the struggle within the Party. It is even more absurd to talk of the
preservation of influence over the masses. Where has it happened
in history that a group which has been utterly defeated in the
struggle owing to its mistakes has been able to preserve ihfluence
-0ver the masses? And yet it should be clear to any but the blind
that the premature action, which was doomed to failure, and the
subsequent complete defeat were the result of mistakes and bad
.and incorrect leadership.
"Whether by capitulation or by irreconcilable tactics, loss of
influence is inevitable. But in the former case it may be possible,
slowly, gradually and by persistent work within the Party and the
Soviet apparatus, to restore, to _again earn the confidence of the
masses and influence over the masses."
What do we find here? It seems to me to be an evaluation of
the tactical line of the Trotskyites from the standpoint of the interests of the Trotskyite struggle against the Party, and not a break
with Trotskyi sm.
RAKOVSKY: Yes, that is so; I fully confirm that.
VYSHINSKY (to Krestinsky): You have heard the detailed
·explanation Rakovsky has given of your so-called departure from
Trotskyism. Do you consider Rakovsky's explanation correct?
KRESTINSKY: What he says is right.
THE PRESIDENT: You confirm what Rakovsky said?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: If what Rakovsky said is true, will you continue to deceive the Court and to deny that the testimony you gave
in the preliminary investigation was true?
KRESTINSKY: I fully confirm the testimony I gave in the
preliminary investigation.
VYSHINSKY: I have no questions to ask Rakovsky.
I have one question to ask Krestinsky: What, then, is the meaning of the statement you made yesterday, which cannot be regarded
-0therwise than as a piece of Trotskyite provocation in court?
KRESTINSKY: Yesterday, under the influence of a momentary
keen feeling of false shame, evoked by the atmosphere of the
dock and the painful impression created by the public reading of
the indictment, which was aggravated by my poor health, I could
not bring myself to tell the truth: I could not bring myself to say
157

that I was guilty. And instead of saying, "Yes, I am guilty, H·
I almost mechanically answered, "No, I am not guilty."
VYSHINSKY: Mechanically?
KRESTlNSKY: In the face of world public opinion, I had not
the strength to admit the truth that I had been conducting a Trotskyite struggle all along. I request the Court to register my·
statement that I fully and completely admit that I am guilty·
of all the gravest charges brought against me personally, and that
I admit my complete responsibility for the treason and treachery
I have committed.
VYSHlNSKY: I have nothing more to ask the accused Krestinsky for the present.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Krestinsky, be seated.
We shall now proceed to examine the accused Rykov.
Accused Rykov, do you confirm the testimony you gave in the·
preliminary investigation?
RYKOV: I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any ques-·
tions to put to the accused Rykov?
VYSH IN SKY: I have a number of questions.
Accused Rykov, tell us, when did your underground, conspiratorial activities against the Soviet government begin?
RYKOV: Essentially, they began in 1928.
VYSHINSKY: Did they assume shape in 1928?
RYKOV: Perhaps; it is difficult to remember.
VYSHINSKY: Approximately at that period.
Tell us, in what were your anti-Soviet activities expressed at
that time; what immediate organizational tasks and what aims diet
you set yourselves?
RYKOV: At that time, from 1928 to 1930 . . .
VYSHINSKY: And subsequently?
RYKOV: I speak of this period because it was all of one type.
I actively fought the policy of the Party and the Soviet government, and chiefly the policy of the Party towards the peasantry_
This activity was expr'essed in my, so to speak, legal utterances.
In this period the illegal organization utilized the legal opportunities.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us about the illegal activities. It is the
illegal activities that interest me.
RYKOV: In this period the one could not be separated from
the other, because the illegal organization in this perJod existed in
order to utilize legal opportunities. Legal opportunities had the following result: they afforded the possibility of intercourse with
people and sections of the population, of which tqe illegal organization was deprived in the following period. Therefore the directing
centre, to which I belonged, acted legally and utilized
158

all opportunities. Therefore, as to me, I made legal public utterances at that period; I was Chairman of the Council of People's
Commissars, and therefore my legal utterances possessed a special
significance, which the Party at that time still allowed me.
VYSHINSKY: What were your relations in 1928-29 with
Yagoda?
RYKOV: Everything in my relations with Yagoda was illegal.
Already at that period, side by side with the legal part, i.e., the
group of members of the counter-revolutionary Right organization
who acted legally, we had cadres who were specially kept secret
with the object of organizing the further struggle against the Party.
One of these people was Yagoda, with whom at that period, and
prior to that period, I was connected personally, and from whom
I received special information, which I used for my attacks upon
the policy of the Party in the rural districts. When later, at a meeting of the Political Bureau, Yagoda 's sympathy with us on the
question of the extraordinary measures against the kulaks in the
matter of the grain collections came to light, he after a while performed a double-dealing manoeuvre and proclaimed himself to be
a supporter of the Party, while actually remaining a member of
our counter-revolutionary organization. Moreover, this was done not
only with my knowledge, but, as far as I can remember, on my
advice.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have an understanding with Yagoda
that no repressive measures were to be adopted against the members
of your underground organization?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Was there an understanding with Yagoda that
he was to use his official position to protect the underground organization of the Rights?
RYKOV: Y~s.
VYSHINSKY: And what official position did he hold at that
time?
RYKOV: He 'was Vice-Chairman, under Chairman of the
O.G.P.U., Menzhinsky.
VYSHINSKY: Vice-Chairman of the O.G.P.U?
RYKOV: Yes. That is chiefly why we endeavoured to keep
him on a secret footing.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to question Yagoda.
Accused Yagoda, do you confirm this part of Rykov's testimony?
YAGO DA: I confirm the fact, but not its formulation.
VYSHINSKY: You do not like the formulation?
YAGO DA: The fact is true, but not as Rykov puts it.
VYSHINSKY: Was this in 1929?
YAGO DA: It was.
159

VYSHINSKY (to Rykov): Accused Rykov, you say that this
was in 1929?
RYKOV: Yes, it was in 1929.
VYSHINSKY: At any rate, it was when you, accused Yagoda,
were Vice-Chairman of the O.G.P.U. and when it was your duty
to combat underground groups?
YAGODA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you committed direct high trea·son?
YAGO DA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated. Accused Rykov, continue.
RYKOV: I shall pursue the subject of Yagoda. From the very
beginning of our open struggle against the Party, a number of the
members of our counter-revolutionary Right organization did
not openly proclaim that they supported the Rights. To this group,
in addition to Yagoda, belonged such people as Antipov,
.Razumov and Rumyantsev.
VYSHINSKY: And of the people who are in the dock?
RYKOV: Here?
VYSHINSKY: Sitting to the right of you.
RYKOV: As regards Ivanov, he performed a manoeuvre in this
respect. He was known to belong to the Right deviation. He
was also one of the first to manoeuvre. I know of nobody else
here. Bukharin and I acted openly; as to the others, I cannot
say whether there were open acts in defence of the program of the
Rights. Regarding Ivanov, I can say that there were. There even
existed separate groups, like the whole of the Leningrad group,
-consisting of Komarov and a number of others.
Thus at this period of the so-called open struggle, in addition
to the legal and open struggle, there at once began to form an illegal centre of the Rights, consisting of Bukharin, Tomsky and
myself. It arose of itself, because the three of us belonged to the
Political Bureau at one and the same time. The direction of the
struggle was in our hands. This centre held on and continued its
-counter-revolutionary work until quite recently.
The illegal work consisted in the fact that in that period, 192830, similar groups began to be created elsewhere on the territory
-0f the Soviet Union. I cannot give a precise enumeration of what
groups were formed, where and in what number. There were a
number of members of our organization in various places, as has
been enumerated, including people like Kabakov, secretary . . .
VYSHINSKY: That is unnecessary.
RYKOV: The chief components of the counter-revolutionary
organization in Moscow were Tomsky and his trade unionists, Bukharin and his connections, in particular his disciples and his
~'school," I myselfwitha number of myfollowers, and Uglanovwith
160

a group of his Moscow followers. This at once created the organization of the Rights. Unti 11930 there proceeded a process of enlargement of this organization and of utilizing public utterances to
recruit followers and to create a definite popularity for the organization.
We utilized the Trade Union Congress for this purpose, for the
purpose of fighting the Party. Practically every one of the 93 people
who voted for Tomsky and against the Party at the Trade Union
Congress joined our counter-revolutionary organization.
And so there were elements of double-dealing, of illegal work
concealed from the Party from the very beginning.
There were various shades of opinion regarding a legal or illegal counter-revolutionary organization. One of the members, like
Antipov, let us say, and a number of others, at once insisted on the
early adoption of illegal methods, not attributing the slightest
importance to the legal struggle and considering that a legal
footing only led to the exposure of cadres, that it promised no
chance of success; but certain members of the organization, a large
number of them, had a high opinion of legal action. When at plenums, conferences and congresses of the Party the position of the
Rights was systematically exposed, it became perfectly clear that
it would be impossible to maintain a legal position. Thereupon
began a serie5 of declarations of abandonment of Right views.
The purpose of all these declarations was to deceive the Party. The
centre, to which I also belonged, gave direct instructions that such
declarations should be submitted.
Somewhat later, among the last, Bukharin, Tomsky and I submitted a statement renouncing the advocacy of the Right platform. It was designed to deceive the Party. After the Party Congress had passed a resolution declaring that the views of the Rights
were incompatible with membership of the Party, we decided to
adopt an illegal footing completely. There were some absolutely
secret methods of utilizing the legal press; but they rarely succeed·
ed, and could not succeed; and we had therefore to assume an
illegal footing.
Thus from 1930 onwards the counter-revolutionary organization
was 100 per cent illegal; its work was based on deceiving the
Party.
Apart from the declaration I had submitted, we, and I in particular, published in the newspaper several articles criticizing our
own statements and views. This was designed for the same
purpose-deception.
VYSH INS KY: So deceit of the Party was a system you practised
very widely?
RYKOV: Yes, of course, it was a system that was practised
very widely. I have cited as an example the report I made to the
1t

161

Urals Regional Conference. This was in 1930. It is characteristic·
of this report that, at a time when the chief link of the whole work
of the Party, the working class and the peasantry, was the struggle
for collectivization and for the liquidation of the kulaks as a class,
I made a report in which this thesis was entirely omitted. Here
I employed silence, a silence which in many cases speaks far louder·
than publicity. I employed this method at a conference in Sverdlovsk, about which Zubarev has told you, and at which I met him.
Such was the situation in 1930. Today I can mention several people.
VYSHINSKY: That does not interest me. I am interested in
another question. Did your directing centre function in the period
1928-29?
RYKOV: Yes, the trio functioned from the outset.
VYSHINSKY: Of whom did it consist?
RYKOV: Bukharin, Tomsky and myself.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, it may be directly affirmed that
as far back as 1928 the illegal group of Rights already had their
directing centre in the persons of this trio?
RYKOV: Of· course.
VYSHINSKY: Let us pass to the next period.
RYKOV: The next period was 1930-33. This was the period'
when there evolved the most criminal methods of work and aims;
that the counter-revolutionary organization set itself. I must say
that it would be wrong to assert that in the period 1928-30 none
of the Rights spoke in favour of ~dopting such methods as terrorism.
VYSHINSKY: Were there such?
RYKOV: Of course. At that period certain persons were already
demanding the adoption of such methods; but these were only the·
heralds of what was subsequently adopted in the shape of the tactics.
of the counter-revolutionary Right organization. As regards lines
of principle, the so-called Ryutin program was characteristic of
the period 1930-33. This Ryutin program was discussed twice in
1932 at Tomsky's summer residence with my participation. In
addition to myself, there were present at the first meeting
Bukharin and Tomsky and a number of other persons, among them
Vasily Schmidt and Uglanov.
VYSHINSKY: Was Bukharin there?
RYKOV: Bukharin was at the first meeting, when the original
theses were drawn up.
VYSHINSKY: Was he at the second meeting?
RYKOV: Bukharin was not present at the second meeting. He
was on vacation; but later, having acquainted himself with the
platform, he fully approved and identified himself with it.
VYSHINSKY: You and Tomsky were uresent at the second
meeting?
·
162

RYKOV: At the first meeting I, Tomsky, Bukharin, Uglanov
and Schmidt were present.
VYSHINSKY: Vasily?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Vasily Schmidt?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And who was present at the second meeting?
RYKOV: The same people were present at the second meeting,
except for Bukharin, and with the addition of two other persons,
whom I have mentioned, and certain persons whose names I do
not know-they were invited by Uglanov and took part. Here
both the content and form are interesting. The platform was called
after Ryutin, because it was published by supporters of the Rights,
the Ryutin group, from Uglanov's Moscow organization.
During the investigation instituted in connection with this platform, this group took the whole responsibility upon itself. This
had been decided on beforehand, so that we ourselves should not
be called to account for the platform. We managed to do this thanks
to the fact that Yagoda was at the head of the O.G.P.U.
VYSH lNSKY: So Yagoda shielded you?
RYKOV: And to make it easier to do this, the program itself
contained a phrase which expressed a certain sense of aloofness
from Bukharin, Tomsky and myself; it said something to the
effect that these three were waste steam. This was done from
motives of double-dealing.
VYSHINSKY: So that even then there were elements of terrorism in your activities?
RYKOV: The formulation was essentially one of tactics. The
platform recognized (as far as I remember, and I do remember, for
I had a share in editing it) methods of violence in changing the
leadership of the Party and of the country-terrorism and uprisings. It was formulated so broadly as to constitute an instruction
that measures of violence should be applied in whatever forms
might prove to be at our disposal. Tqe second formulation was
the uniting of those forces, those organizations, which were combating the Party and the government of the U.S.S.R. These two
theses were fundamental and decisive in the Ryutin platform and
at the same time for the whole subsequent period.
How was this program put into effect? This period was marked
by an acute class struggle in the countryside and the strong
resistance of the kulaks, the peasant bourgeoisie, to the government
and the Party. This laid a special imprint on the period. During
this period our counter-revolutionary work aimed at relying on,
and it to a certain degree did rely on, the forces of counter-revolution which had at that time become activized. I am referring to the
kulak actions, the kulak risings,. the kulak sabotage which at that
11•

163

time was fairly widespread. We adopted all the forms of utilizing
the anti-Soviet, bourgeois forces in the countryside for combating
the Party and the government-from utilizing actions that had
already matured to the deliberate organization of kulak uprisings.
As an example, I can quote two cases in which the centre took a direct part. Of course, the centre could not dirEct each particular
action in every locality, but in two instances, which are of significance in connection with the present case, this did take place.
I am referring to the North Caucasus and Siberia.
VYSHINSKY: The North Caucasus-what year are you referring to?
RYKOV: In this case it is difficult to distinguish . . . . I think
it was 1931, 1932 and 1933.
VYSHINSKY: 1930 is not included?
RYKOV (after a silence): I fear to m1ke a mistake.
VYSHINSKY: What about the dispute which occurred this
morning between the accused Bukharin and the accused Ivanov
regarding the line for an insurrectionary movement in the North
Caucasus? According to your recollection_, was there such a Jim?
RYKOV: My own personal participation in the counter-revolutionary work of the centre dates from a later period and is connected with the dispatch of Eismont to the Caucasus in 1932.
VYSHINSKY: But you said that in 1928 you were connected
with Ivanov?
RYKOV: Who, I?
VYSHINSKY: No, the Right group.
RYKOV: I heard Ivanov say today that he belonged to the
Right group, but I had no personal connections with him.
VYSHINSKY: So this was a separate line of Bukharin and
lvanov?
RYKOV: I do not know. After all, every member of the centre
could not have dealings with all the members of the organization.
VYSHINSKY: That is clear, but Bukharin and Ivanov were
connected by underground work. Did you know that Ivanov had
a share in it?
RYKOV: I did not. It may be that I have forgotten the fact,
but the name Ivanov has no place in my memory.
VYSHINSKY: But is it possible that individual members of
your centre had their own people and did not inform each other
about all the people?
RYKOV: This, in my opinion, is not only possible hut absolutely inevitable, because it was not a question of a hundred or so
people, but of far more numerous cadres. It is quite possible that
not ev~rybody knew all the members of the organization.
VYSHINSKY: Even in the case of such an important underground worker as Ivanov?
164

RYKOV: Even in that case.
VYSH INS KY: Continue.
RYKOV: The Right centre devoted special attention to the
North Caucasus owing to its high proportion of Cossacks and wealthy
peasants, and the specific character of its traditions, and also in
view of its political and economic importance as a region bordering on the Ukraine, possessing a large number of national republics
and supplying a large quantity of grain.
Eismont went there specially in 1932 with the purpose of organizing our partici pa ti on in the kulak movement, inasmuch as it
was developing fairly strongly. Eismont went there with my knowledge and after a preliminary talk with me, with the object, as
I have already said, of sharpening the kulak movement in the
North Caucasus in every way and ot helping it to spread. Later on
he told me that he had got in tocch with Pivovarov, and in addition to Eismont, Slepkov, one of the prominent members of the
Bukharin organization, was sent there. He was sent wjth Bukharin's knowledge and on his initiative.
VYSHINSKY: With Bukharin's knowledge?
RYKOV: On his initiative. I don't think Bukharin will deny
that. I sent Eismont and Smirnov, while he sent Slepkov.
VYSHINSKY: With what concrete instructions did Slepkov
go there?
RYKOV: The detailed instructions were given by Bukharin,
but the principal instructions, as I have already said, were to
sharpen the dissatisfaction of the kulaks in every way, including
every kind of open action.
VYSH INS KY: In other words, to organize kulak actions, kulak
insurrections?
RYKOV: Of course. That is what I said. O~ly, in those cases
where there were no prospects for armed action, to organize unarmed
actions.
VYSHINSKY: That was Slepkov's task?
RYKOV: That was the task which in my opinion must have
been given him.
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin gave it?
RYKOV: Bukharin gave it with our knowledge, so that I regard myself as being fully responsible for it.
VYSHINSKY: What do you say, accused Bukharin?
BUKHARIN: I corroborate all that Rykov has said here up to
now. Slepkov was sent to the North Caucasus precisely for this
purpose. It must be said for the sake of historical exactitude . . . .
VYSHINSKY: Don't trouble to speak for history, accused Bukharin. History will itself record what will be interesting for history. Now Rykov said here that with the knowledge of the centre,
on the direct instructions of the centre, and in particular, with his

165

own, Rykov's, and your, Bukharin's, instructions, in the North
Caucasus, in 1931 or 1932 . . .
BUKHARIN: I think it was in the spring of 1932.
RYKOV: Yes, it was in 1932.
VYSHINSKY: So that, in the spring of 1932, on the direct instructions of the centre, and in particular of Rykov and Bukharin,
Slepkov, one of your closest colleagues in the underground organization, is sent to the North Caucasus for the purpose of doing everything, as Rykov said, to organi1e kulak risings. Is that right?
BUKHARIN: But I have said that I corroborate everything
that Rykov has said here from the first word to the last.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you sent Slepkov to organize kulak insurrections in the North Caucasus?
BUKHARIN: Hence, I sent him for the purpose of raising insurrections.
.
VYSHINSKY: Did you personally instruct Slepkov?
BUKHARIN: Slepkov needed no instruction whatever, because
he was a sufficiently qualified person.
VYSHINSKY: Qualified in what respect?
BUKHARIN: Qualified for the purpose of drawing the neces- ·
sary organizational and practical conclusions.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, qualified also for the purpose
of raising insurrections?
BUKHARIN: And for the purpose of raising insurrections. The
task then was to sharpen kulak discontent with the Soviet power
in every way, to fan this discontent, to organize cadres and to
organize actions, including armed kulak insurrections.
VYSHINSKY: That is exactly what I wanted to know.
BUKHARIN: And that is exactly what I say.
VYSHINSKY: Now we can pass to Siberia.
RYKOV: As for Siberia, I know from what Bukharin said •.
VYSHINSKY: What about?
RYKOV: About the fact that Yakovenko was doing the same
kind of work in Siberia as was being done in the North Caucasus,
that is to say, he was striving to rouse the kulaks to insurrection. He
frequently met Bukharin and talked with him. Of course, Bukharin
gave him the line, gave him instructions and urged him.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to question Bukharin
on this matter.
BUKHARIN: All I need do here is to say more or less emphatically, because I suggested to Yakovenko a plan. . . .
VYSHINSKY: What plan?
BUKHARIN: A plan of insurrection with the aid of partisans
in some region of Siberia.
VYSHINSKY: So this fact did take place?
166

BUKHARIN: This fact did take place. I reported this at a
·meeting of the centre, I think the whole trio were present.
VYSHINSKY: But Rykov appears to be denying it.
BUKHARIN: I am speaking as I remember it.
VYSHINSKY: Did the accused Rykov correctly relate the fact
.about your sending Yakovenko to Siberia for the purpose of organizing kulak insurrections?
BUKHARIN: He did. Yakovenko accidentally met me in Ser·ebryanny Bor. He said that sufficient forces were available for
-the purpose of raising an insurrection. At first I did not consent,
but said I would consult my colleagues. I formally submitted the
·question to the centre for discussion.
VYSHINSKY: In 1932?
BUKHARIN: Yes. They expressed displeasure at my failing to
·give Yakoven.ko an affirmative answer at once.
VYSHINSKY: Had you given an affirmative answer?
BUKHARIN: No, they expressed displeasure because I had
not given an affirmative answer.
VYSHINSKY: Please, will you repeat this? I did not hear.
BUKHARIN: Excuse me, perhaps I am not speaking loud
·enough. After this decision was arrived at I informed Yakovenko
·of it.

VYSHINSKY: What did you tell Yakovenko?
BUKHARIN: I told him, without going into the details of
the technical side, that the centre was in favol;lr of exciting the
movement and of raising insurrection.
VYSHINSKY: And did he go?
BUKHARIN: Yes, he went.
VYSHINSKY: Well, and were there kulak risings in Siberia?
BUKHARIN: Yes, there were.
VYSHINSKY: Do you remember, was that in the Biisk Disirict?
BUKHARIN: I do not remember, perhaps it was in the Biisk
District.
VYSHINSKY: That is not so essential.
BUKHARIN: No, it is not so essential.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, what official work did you do apart
·from organizing kulak insurrections?
BUKHARIN: I was a member of the Central Committee, a
.member of the Central Executive Committee.
VYSHINSKY: And later?
BUKHARIN: Later I worked at the People's Commissariat
·Of Heavy Industry.
VYSHINSKY: In what capacity?
BUKHARIN: In the capacity of director of one of the depart1ments.
167

VYSHINSKY: Which?
BUKHARIN: The scientific and technical.
VYSHINSKY: And simultaneously, as a joint occupation, you
directed the organization of kulak insurrections?
BUKHARIN: Ironically it can be called a joint occupation,
but, as I have already said, I don't intend to be witty here.
VYSHINSKY: In 1932 you took the path of open treason. Is
that right or not?
BUKHARIN: Quite right. I have said that I date this with the
Ryutin platform.
VYSHINSKY: That means 1930?
BUKHARIN: The Ryuti n platform was adopted at the notorious
conference held in the autumn of 1932, orinthesummer,anditwas
approved at the meeting of which Alexei Ivanovich Rykov spoke.
VYSHINSKY: That means 1932?
BUKHARIN: The autumn of 1932.
VYSHINSKY: That date marks the beginning of your high
treason?
BUKHARIN: Yes, that date.
VYSHINSKY: But before that date there were other dates,
about which we shall speak later on.
BUKHARIN: Yes, there undoubtedly were other dates.
VYSHINSKY: 1918, for example?
BUKHARIN: This stands somewhat separately. . . .
VYSHINSKY: We will speak about it separately, but I am now
speaking about your activities.
BUKHARIN: I am speaking, Citizen Procurator, from the
point of view of the evolution of the Right deviation which
grew into a counter-revolutionary, terrorist, treasonable group.
VYSHINSKY: This process of evolution was consummated
in 1932?
BUKHARIN: Yes, it was consummated and assumed definite
ideological shape.
VYSHINSKY: I am interested now not in ideology, but in
criminology.
BUKHARIN: But ideology may also be criminal; actions are
performed by thinking people.
VYSHINSKY: That may be so, but what interests us is action,
practice.
BUKHARIN: I have been questioned so many times about
the Ryutin platform, perhaps this is a mistake on the part of the investigation, but I must say . . .
VYSHINSKY: And so, you yourself date your activities as
a conspirator and traitor from 1932 in connection with the evolution of the Right deviation into a counter-revolutionary organization. Is that right?
168

BUKHARIN: That is right.
VYSHINSKY: And so, you have to your account preparatiorn
for and organization of kulak insurrections in the North Caucasus,.
and preparation for and organization of kulak insurrections in
Western Siberia. Is that so?
BUKHARIN: That is so.
VYSHINSKY (to Rykov): Accused Rykov, was this. known
to you too? Was this done with your knowledge?
RYKOV: Of course. As for the dates, in my opinion this is a
formal question. And before the infant, the Ryutin platform,
could be born, there had to be pregnancy, pregnancy with a document like the Ryutin program, and this was quite definitely
loss of virginity.
VYSHINSKY: Well, that's clear.
RYKOV: Connected with the North Caucasus there is still
another criminal factor, and that is the connection with the Socialist-Revolutionaries, which we had discussed previously to
this especially in connection with kulak insurrections, and also in·
connection with the fact that some of the members of the centre,
and of the illegal organization generally, considered that it was
necessary to establish contact with, to utilize, the kulak movement
for the work of the Right organization and the organization of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries. Connection with the Socialist-Revolutionaries on the basis of joint anti-Soviet kulak risings was, as
Eismont informed me, actuaily established in the North Caucasus.
But these movements, of course, created an extremely tense
situation in the country,. and increased the aspirations, expectations and hopes of the Rights of coming into power. Although
these movements were in fact kulak, that is to say anti-Soviet movements, on the other hand, we nevertheless regarded
them as a mass movement in the country, which served asa support
for the Right deviation.
I remember a discussion we had on this subject in the trio and!
also among the followers of the Right deviation. Here many argued and quoted the example of the Kronstadt uprising and urged:
that with the aid of kulak risings it would be possible to create
not one, but several Kronstadts, and achieve corresponding
po Ii ti cal success.
This is the first thing that is characteristic of the crimes we
committed in the period of 1930-33.
In this period also the views of the Rights on the question
of terrorism took shape.
VYSHINSKY: On terrorism?
RYKOV: On the question of terrorism it is also difficult to
establish an absolutely exact dividing line, say, the fifth of suchand-such a month and such-and-such a year. Terrorist moods be169

gan to develop as far back as 1930, as far as I know. They
!ound expression in Radin, who stood close to me. Approximately
in 1932 our positive attitude toward the. application of terrorism took shape as a metl:J.od of struggle for power and found
practical expression. I cannot conceive of theoretical terrorism.
When people talk about terrorism it is a purely practical thing.
One can't indulge in the theory of terrorism without practice. As
soon as the line was adopted, corresponding organizational and practical conclusions were drawn from it at once; that is to say, a
number of terrorist groups were formed. I myself gave a number
·of terrorist instructions to a number of persons, apart from those
who stood close to me, like Nesterov and Radin. I conveyed these
instructions also to the nationalist organizations; I discussed the
.question of terrorism with the members of the Pan-Tyurkic and
Byelorussian nationalist organizations, and soon the terrorist line
and the corresponding conclusions drawn from it were widely
.adopted. In addition to these discussions on this question I had
others. Nesterov later reported that on my instructions an organization had been formed in Sverd!Qvsk, in the Urals.
Later on, in 1935, I had a talk about terrorism with Kotov,
a leading member of the Moscow Right organization. Approximately in 1934, I instructed my former secretary Artemenko to
watch for passing government automobiles.
Other members of our counter-revolutionary organization adopted similar measures. But we never passed any definite decision
that such-and-such a member of the government is to be killed.
The centre of the Right organization n~ver adopted such a decision; but its work consisted of preparing such an attitude towards
terrorism and such a state of terrorist cadres as wou.Id enable
such a decision to be carried out whenever the centre adopted one.
In this period also terrorist connections were established with
the Socialist-Revolutionary Semyonov through Bukharin. I did
not know Semyonov personally. Bukharin told me that through
:Semyonov he was preparing for an attempt on the life of Stalin.
Later on, as far as I remember, we discussed the question of
-establishing contact with the Socialist-Revolutionaries on this
matter, and this contact was established through Bukharin, who
had the firmest connections. I also had a conversation about terrnrism with Beloborodov while travelling to a health resort in
the North Caucasus. This was approximately in 1934.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to dwell on the role
-0f Semyonov.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, how do you know about Bukharin's connection with this Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist
Semyonov?
170

RYKOV: I heard about it from Bukharin, who told me that
'he h:id had connections with Semyonov ever since the trial of
the Socialist-Revolutionaries in connection with the attempt on
the life of Lenin; as is 'well known, at this trial Bukharin
defended Sernyonov.
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin defended Semyonov?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSH INS KY: Did you ever meet Semyonov at Bukharin >s?
RYKOV: One day I visited Bukharin at his apartment and
I found a stranger sitting there who left after my arrival.
VYSHINSKY: When you spoke about this you had Semyonov
in mind?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin told you that this was the Semyonov
who was organizing the attempt on the life of Stalin?
·
RYKOV: Whether it was he who was organizing it I cannot say.
VYSHINSKY: Were you posted on the organization of this
attempt?
RYKOV: I was not posted on this matter, but evidently I
knew about it.
VYSHINSKY: During the preliminary investigation you saidi:hat is why I am asking you about it-"In 1932 or in the beginning of 1933, on visiting Bukharin, I found there a stranger
in his apartment who left soon after. After his departure Bukharin
told me that this was the Semyonov whom he had known since the
trial of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, at which he defended him"
{this is what you have just now testified), "and he went on to say
that the Socia list-Revolutionaries were preparing an attempt on the
lives of Stalin and Kaganovich. Bukharin and I accepted this
-communication with satisfaction, as its execution would have facilitated the counter-revolutionary activities of the Rights."
Do you corroborate this episode?
_ - ,{YKOV: Yes.
~ _VYSH INS KY (to the Court): Permit me to question the ac-cused Bukharin.
Accused Bukharin, do you corroborate this?
BUKHARIN: In the main I corroborate it, but there are a
number ...
VYSHINSKY: Let us take things in their order.
BUKHARIN: But I w~nted to clear up ...
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, I want to explain to you
that you will have time to clear things up and explain when you
are examined. At present I am interrogating you on a question
that is connected with another of the accused. Is the accused
Rykov telling the truth when he says that in 1932-33 he found
a man in your apartment whom you called Semyonov?
171

BUKHARIN: It is possible, I do not remember definitely·
whether he saw Semyonov and whether that scene took place ...•
VYSHINSKY: But you were connected with Semyonov?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I was connected with him. Rykov knew
about this connection because I myself told him about it. Whether
this was the form ...
VYSHINSKY: That is not important. The important thing
for me now is to establish whether you were connected with the
Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist Semyonov.
BUKHARIN: That is true, but Semyonov was a member of
the Party.
VYSHINSKY: You, too, were a member of the Party.
BUKHARIN: As for Semyonov, I ...
VYSHINSKY: You defended him?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You, while being a member not only of the
Communist Party but of its Central Committee, organized terrorist acts against the leaders of the Party?
BUKHARIN. Quite true.
VYSHINSKY: Therefore, the fact that Semyonov was formally
a member of the Communist Party makes no difference. Were
you connected with him as with a Communist or a Socialist-Revolutionary?
BUKHARIN: I do not think I was connected with him as
with a Socialist-Revolutionary but as with a terrorist who
sympathized with the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: That is why it is no use harping on the fact
that he was a member of the Communist Party.
BUKHARIN: I did not want to minimize my guilt, I wantedl
to aggravate it.
VYSHINSKY: I do not want to aggravate your guilt, I am
talking about facts. Were you connected with Semyonov, the
Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist; were they terrorist connections?
BUKHARIN: They did not start as terrorist connections.
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking how they started, I am asking
what they were at that time.
BUKHARIN: At that time they were terrorist connections.
VYSHINSKY: You had then learnt from Semyonov that preparations were being made for an attempt on the lives of Comrades
Stalin and Kaganovich?
BUKHARIN: No, Rykov is not putting it quite correctly.
The position was as follows. Semyonov reported that he had connections with various Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist groups,.
and as he knew the moods among the Right counter-revolutionary organizations concerning terrorism, he proposed that these
connections be utilized.
172

VYSHINSKY: For what purpose?
BUKHARIN: For terrorist activities.
VYSHINSKY: Of what kind?
BUKHARIN: For terrorist activities against the leadership
-0f the Party.
VYSHINSKY: That is?
BUKHARIN: A number of members of the Political Bureau
were mentioned.
VYSHINSKY: Including whom?
BUKHARIN: Including Stalin and Kaganovich.
VYSHINSKY: And so, in 1932youandSemyonov talked about
this, that an attempt should be organized on the lives of Comrade
:Stalin and of Comrade Kaganovich.
BUKHARIN: I did not say that it should; I am saying what
11appened.
VYSHINSKY: I say that in 1932 you had a talk on this,
that an attempt was being prepared on the lives of Comrades
:Stalin and Kaganovich.
BUKHARIN: If you formulate it like that, it gives it an absolutely concrete character.
VYSH INS KY: Very concrete.
BUKHARIN: At that time we talked about terrorist acts
.against the leading men of the Party.
VYSHINSKY: Was it a theoretical talk?
BUKHARIN: No. Organizing groups is not a theoretical
ialk.
VYSHINSKY: What did you talk about?
BUKHARIN: We talked about terrorist plans on the organization of preparations to carry out this plan against members
-0f the Politicd Bureau.
VYSHINSKY: Including whom?
BUKHARIN: Including Stalin and Kaganovich.
VYSHINSKY: That, then, is concrete.
BUKHARIN. Quite concrete. I wanted to decipher and say
<=xactly what actually happened.
VYSH INS KY: I ask the Court to permit me to read the testimony given by the accused Bukharin during the preliminary investigation.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Pages 105-06; when the Procurator of the
Union interrogated you on December 1, you, accused Bukharin,
testified as follows: "I want to state the truth and I dtclare that
I reported this proposal" (this is preceded by the rderence to
Semyonov's proposal) "to a conft:rence of the centre and we dedded to instruct Semyonov to organize terrorist groups."
BUKHARIN: Yes.
173

VYSHINSKY: This is right?
BUKHARIN: Right.
VYSHINSKY: This precisely refers to 1932?
BUKHARIN: Quite true.
VYSHINSKY: Thus, in 1932, you on the decision of the centre of the Right organization instructed Semyonov to organize
a terrorist group. Is that so, or not?
BUKHARIN: It is so.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you instruct him to organize a terrorist group?
BUKHARIN: In order to commit terrorist acts.
VYSHINSKY: Against whom?
BUKHARIN: Against members of the Political Bureau.
VYSHINSKY: Including whom?
BUKHARIN: Including Stalin.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, we may say that the Right centre decided in 1932 to commit terrorist acts against members of the Political Bureau, including Comrade Stalin and Comrade Kaganovich,.
and instructed Semyonov to carry them out. Is this so?
BUKHARIN: In the sense of a line, it is so.
VYSHINSKY: Yes or no?
BUKHARIN: But this does not mean that the whole machine
had been set and the signal had been given.
VYSHINSKY: We know how machines are set and how they
operate.
BUKHARIN: I say this for the sake of exactitude.
VYSHINSKY: Well, we have achieved exactitude. Please be·
seated. Continue, accused Rykov.
RYKOV: I repeat, I cannot guarantee that my memory is:
absolutely exact. But I remember the episode literally in such a
way that . . .
VYSHINSKY: That you accepted with satisfaction Bukharin's
communication to Semyonov, or Semyonov's communication fo,
Bukharin, or Semyonov's and Bukharin's communication?
RYKOV: This means that considered from a political point.
of view the most odious thing about the whole matter is that
we wanted to use others to . . .
VYSHINSKY: To do what?
RYKOV: Commit terrorist acts.
VYSHINSKY: Was that put concretely, or only theoretically?
RYKOV: I have already said that theoretical terrorism does.
not exist for me.
VYSHINSKY: I und~rstand it that way too.
RYKOV: But the centre did not adopt a decision in such-andsuch a year to kill such-and-such a member of the Political Bureau
174

or of the government. The centre took measures that would enable
such a decision to be put into effect if one were adopted . . . .
VYSHINSKY: In either case.it was a matter of utilizing the
Socialist-Revolutionary terrorists for an attempt on the lives of
Comrade Stalin and Comrade Kaganovich.
RYKOV: Yes, that is how I understood it. And here it appears
a disagreement arises between me and Bukharin. I thought that
Semyonov was organizing this as a . member of another organization. The version that Bukharin outlined to the effect that
I instructed Semyonov to create some kind of special terrorist
organization I hear for the first time.
BUKHARIN: It is very simple . . . .
VYSHINSKY: Very simple.
.
BUKHARIN: It is quite understandable. The understandability lies in what I said: I do not refute Rykov when he says
that he met Semyonov in my apartment. He might have met him.
But this is not the point. Semyonov might have told him, I might
have told him, Semyonov might have told him first and I might
have told him afterwards, both of us might have told him. The·
fact is that Semyonov made a proposal; this proposal became known
not only to me, but also to my accomplices in crime at that time,
and they agreed. I quite agree with Rykov that there is an even
more odious element in this; using the Socialist-Revolutionaries.
as cat's-paws-this is quite understandable. But I say that
there was, of course, an undoubted attempt to utilize SocialistRevolutionary terrorist forces for the purpose of waging a criminally treacherous fight against the leadership of the Party. Since
I was connected with Semyonov, then undoubtedly, in this.
case, the initiative belonged to me.
I cannot under any circumstances minimize, whitewash in·
one form or another or belittle my initiative in this case.
VYSHINSKY: And so the initiative was yours?
BUKHARIN: I think Semyonov made the proposal to me,.
but as f~r as my accomplices, the Rights, were concerned . . .
VYSHINSKY: Tomsky and Rykov?
BUKHARIN: Yes, here I took the initiative.
VYSHINSKY: And in the case of Semyonov whose initiative·
was it?
BUKHARIN: I do not remember, perhaps it was mine. At all'
events, I do not deny it.
VYSHINSKY: So, accused Bukharin, maybe in this it was.
your initiative in organizing the terrorist act against Comrade
Stalin?
BUKHARIN: This I have admitted. But the whole point is,
and I want to emphasize this, that my initiative does not exclude
the fact that in this case Semyonov received the consent of my

175

two colleagues. I again emphasize that this does not exclude my
initiative in this matter, on the contrary. . . .
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to establish that you, Bukharin,
.as a member of the centre of the Right underground organization,
had underground conspiratorial connections with a SocialistRevolutionary terrorist who, together with you, was preparing the
·organization of an attempt on the lives of Comrade Stalin and other
members of the Political Bureau, and that these preparations of
terrorist acts were being made with the knowledge and approval of
·the Right centre, including Tomsky and Rykov.
BUKHARIN: No, I think, not including, because they were
±he only ones who knew about it.
VYSHINSKY: Well, you, Tomsky and Rykov?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
.
VYSH INS KY (to Rykov): Does Rykov agree with this?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSH INS KY: So there are no disagreements on this point?
BUKHARIN: I want to emphasize that the initiative in this
matter lies on my shoulders.
VYSHINSKY: Your initiative in relation to Rykov and
'Tomsky?
BUKHARIN: Quite true.
VYSH lNSKY: So that here the Socialist-Revolutionary line
and the Bukharin line converged?
BUKHARIN: This, too, is possible.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions for the time being.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Be seated.
We shall continue the examination of the accused Rykov.
Comrade Procurator, have you any more questions?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, of course. (To Rykov.) We have· analysed
part of your crimes. We stopped approximately at 1933.
RYKOV: The end of this period coincided with the liquidation
-0f the kulaks. In connection with this the Rights lost their last
social base-the kulaks. The next period is characterized by the
.creation of an exclusively conspiratorial type of organization and
-the employment of the sharpest methods of struggle against the
Party and the government. This particularly includes one of the
attempts that was made to prepare for a "palace coup."
VYSH INS KY: To when does this refer?
·
RYKOV: This plan aimed to arrest the members of the government in connection with a violent coup carried out by the conspira176

torial organization with the aid of a special organization created
for the purpose of bringing about this coup. As far as I remember,
this idea arose among the Rights in 1933-34, when it began to
assume a more or less definite shape. But, as in the case of terrorism,
when utterances in favour of terrorism were heard before terrorism
had been adopted by the centre of the Right organization, so on
the question of the "palace coup," individual members of the
Right organization expressed themselves in favour of this
method of conspiratorial activity before the Right centre definitely shaped this idea and tried to carry it out. This applies in
particular to me, when in 1930 one of the members of the Right
organization came to me with a fully worked out plan for a "palace coup," with a plan to arrest the government with the aid of
a small specially prepared armed force. At that time I had not yet
discussed this either with Tomsky or with Bukharin. This question
arose in 1933. The mainstay of this counter-revolutionary plan
was Yenukidze, who had become an active member of the Right
organization in 1933. An important role was played by Yagoda,
who was at the head of the G.P.U. These were the starting points
that enabled us to proceed with the organization of the coup. To
be more precise, subsequently the Right centre together with Yenukidze and Tomsky from time to time informed me about the progress of the preparations and execution of this plan. What
month this was is not important; I remember that the first piece
of information I received was about the group of Kremlin officials, and the principal figures here were Yagoda, Peterson,
Gorbachov and Yegorov; I have in mind not the Chief of the General Staff-I don't know what he is doing now-but Yegorov, the
chief of the Kremlin military school. These three names played a
great role in the life of the Kremlin and were in command of the school
and of the entire administrative routine in the Kremlin. Several times
Tomsky informed me about the enlistment through these personsYenukidze and Yegorov-of a group of military officials, headed
by Tukhachevsky, who also prepared to accept this plan and were
working in this direction. He mentioned the names of Uborevich
and Kork. This is the basis of the relationships which afforded
the possibility of carrying out, or at all events of attempting to
carry out, the plan from the point of view of inflicting real damage,
internal damage, apart from connections with abroad. We did not
succeed in making a real attempt, but it might have inflicted
a very serious wound upon Socialist liberty.
I cannot speak of the details of this work because it was kept
very secret. A grnup was formed including very influential people-a military group. This group, from the underground viewpoint, worked independently of the other underground groups
and it was the only one.
12

177

The question arose of how to co-ordinate the forces of the
counter-revolution for the purpose of carrying out the "palace coup."
For this purpose a centre was formed including the Trotskyites
and Zinovievites: Kamenev, Pyatakov, Yenukidze, and also myself, Bukharin and Tomsky. Our task was to weld all the forces around this centre. With this centre were connected Tukhachevsky's military group and Yagoda 's group.
In 1934 we already discussed the possibility of a tactical utilization of this organization in connection with the Seventeenth Party Congress that was about to be held. I do not remember exactly
whether it was on the advice of Tomsky or perhaps of Yenukidze,
but the question was raised of bringing about the coup during
the Seventeenth Party Congress when all responsible workers
would gather, and it would be possible to arrest simultaneously
with most prominent members of the government, also those
workers from the republics and regions who could offer resistance
to the coup. But this plan was rejected. I think that apart from
Tomsky hardly anyone supported it. What prompted its rejection?
Clearly, the principal reason was that the conditions in the country precluded all likelihood of success. The compact unity of the
Party, the popularity of the government and the absence of any
discontent in the country, of course, made such an attempt a sheer
adventure, absolutely futile, and this was the reason why it was
rejected. The organization remained in existence. This proposal
was discussed at a certain time, although, I repeat, it was rejected
by everybody, including myself. Tomsky was the only one in
favour of it. This corroborates the indictment, particularly those
points which refer to this as one of the biggest counter-revolutionary
undertakings. In this connection I must deal with the first paragraph of the indictment-our stake on defeat and on the assistance of the international bourgeoisie. All this refers, at all events
the main part of it refers, to the period after 1933 in conformity
with the ideological, political and practical line, which could be
explained only by the loss of the last basis in the country. Those
who persist in their counter-revolutionary struggle resort to the
measures, methods and allies that we resorted to in the period
after 1933. This refers to the "centre's" connections with the
German fascists. Naturally, we, and I personally, tried to tone
down our testimony on this question because this is a very bad
thing. We depicted the situation so as to make it appear that we
had not discussed these connections in the centre beforehand.
Actually the situation was that Tomsky had taken the initiative.
Bukharin and I heard about it afterwards. But all these are formal
points, because all of us, I and Bukharin, never hesitated for
a moment in deciding that Tomsky was right, and had he asked
us, we would have said it was the proper thing to do. At all
178

events, without reproaching him in the least, we proceeded
to discuss the results of the soundings, as we called them,
but in reality treasonable negotiations that had been going on.
What is characteristic of these negotiations? The characteristic
thing is that Karakhan reported that the German fascists were, of
course, very well disposed towards the prospect of the Rights
coming into power and would welcome it very much .... And
in respect to their military operations against the Soviet Union,
they would agree to co-operation, peaceful cohabitation, on the
condition that definite economic privileges were given, made
in the form of concessions, privileges in foreign trade, and so
forth-that is to say, what Bukharin had proposed at one time,
namely, that we could come to an arrangement with the Germans
by means of concessions of this kind without territorial concessions.
He said that the Germans insisted on the national republics
receiving the right freely to secede from the Union.
VYSHINSKY: What did it mean in essence?
RYKOV: It meant that the largest national republics were to
be wrested from the U.S.S.R., that they would attempt to tum
them into territories adjacent to their own states, convert them
into their vassals and thus obtain an opportunity for an attack
on the rest of the Union. They would thus come close to the heart
of the U.S.S.R. The possibility of waging a successful war against
the U.S.S.R. would thus be facilitated for them.
VYSHINSKY: They would use this as a cover?
RYKOV: They would conceal their designs behind this.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, this meant dismemberment of
the U.S.S.R., wresting a number of republics from it?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Preparing a base for the fascists, for their
attack and victory?
RYKOV: Yes, that is unquestionably so.
VYSHINSKY: Not only tools, but also conscious accomplices?
RYKOV: I do not know whether it is better to be a conscious
or unconscious tool. One is as bad as the other.
VYSHINSKY: You picture it as if you just became the victims of the fascist designs.
RYKOV: No. But in all our aspirations we were not people going
to the very end with regard to fascism; after all, we did confine
our understanding to definite concessions. But we were tools in
the sense that this understanding, all that led up to this understanding, facilitated for fascism the possibility of annuIIing it.
VYSHINSKY: You pursued your criminal objects at the cost
of treason?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: And you did it consciously?
12*

179

RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: And in this sense you were no tools?
RYKOV: Of course, there were negotiations ...
VYSHINSKY: That the fascists wanted to use you-that
is a separate matter. You wanted to use them too, for your aims.
RYKOV: No, I think that objectively it is clear thatthe movement of the Rights and the nationalist movement in our country
are a reflection of the fascist and bourgeois encirclement which
exists, because if there were no bourgeois encirclement and if
there were no fascism, the Right deviation in the U.S.S.R. could
not give rise to them; but they created quite a number of bourgeois
groups. Objectively, that is so.
VYSHINSKY: That is clear, of course. But your plans reduced
themselves to seizing power at the cost of treason?
RYKOV: Well, you know, there is treason and treason.
VYSHINSKY: Proceed.
RYKOV: Thus, our struggle with the Party began to develop,
the methods of the struggle and the aims of the struggle were
becoming clearer all the time. Then came the contact centre.
VYSHINSKY: This contact centre was a result of the organization of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"?
RYKOV: It is hard to tell. The expression ...
VYSHINSKY: What I want to say is that, besides the contact centre, there was a preliminary agreement between you,
which you called a bloc.
RYKOV: Not a bloc, but formally we understood it to be a
bloc with the Trotskyites since 1935. I say formally. But, in addition to formal organizational, relations, there were, of course,
elements of a bloc which found their expression in meetings between
members of one organization and the other. Tomsky frequently met
Zinoviev and Kamenev. Bukharin also met them. These were not the
relationships of a formal bloc. But l<uch meetings and conversations
on political subjects estahlished relations which, politically and in
fact, without their being given the form of a bloc, meant a co-ordination of the activities of those organizations, or a bloc between them.
VYSHINSKY: Will it be right or wrong to say that in the
period of the years 1932-33 a group was organized which we may
call the Anti-Soviet Bloc of Rights and Trotskyites?
RYKOV: It was so in fact. Its organizational expression,
since 1933-34, was the so-called contact centre.
VYSHINSKY: That's it, now; the contact centre represented a
further step in putting the organizational relations ona formal basis?
RYKOV: Yes. In fact and politically that is a correct way
of putting it.
VYSH INSKY: That is correct. And that bloc set itself the·
aim of-how do you formulate it?
180

RYKOV: It set itself the aim of overthrowing the Soviet
system by forcible means, by means of treason and by means of
an agreement with the fascist forces abroad.
VYSHINSKY: On what conditions?
RYKOV: On the conditions of dismembering the U.S.S.R.,
of severing the national republics. At the same time I must say
that, after Karakhan's soundings, that was not our answer to the
Germans. I shall tell about this later. As a matter of fact, our
answer to their proposals went much further and was much worse
than our formal acceptance of their conditions.
VYSHINSKY: This bloc, you said, included the Rights. Who
else was included in this bloc?
RYKOV: The Rights, the Trotskyites and the Zinovievites.
VYSHINSKY: The Zinovievites, and then certain nationalist groups in the Union republics, say in Byelorussia?
RYKOV: Yes. I reserve the national republics for the concluding section of my testimony. I shall speak of that.
VYSHINSKY: Were the Socialist-Revolutionaries included?
RYKOV: In some of the republics.
VYSHINSKY: The Mensheviks were included. Through them
you were connected with Nikolayevsky and Dan abroad. And,
finally, there were separate bourgeois-nationalist groups in the
national republics. For instance, in Byelorussia. Who was there
of the accused?
RYKOV: Of the accused-Sharangovich.
VYSHINSKY: Is it known to you that he was a member of
the bloc?
RYKOV: I learnt of it from Goloded and Chervyakov.
VYSHINSKY: And what about Sharangovich? Were you not
personally connected with him?
RYKOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: But you knew from others that he was connected with the bloc?
RYKOV: I cannot say that.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Sharangovich, were you a member of
the "bloc of Rights and T(otskyites"?
SHARANGOVICH: I was directly connected with Antipov
and I knew of Goloded's connections with Rykov.
VYSHINSKY (to Rykov): And in Central Asia?
RYKOV: With the Pan-Tyurkic organizations.
VYSHINSKY: With whom?
RYKOV: With Ryskulov and Faizulla Khodjayev.
VYSH IN SKY: Accused Faizulla Khodjayev, do you corroborate this?
KHODJAYEV: I do.
VYSHINSKY: That you were a member of this bloc?
181

KHODJAYEV: I maintained direct relations with Rykov,
later I was connected with Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: Directly in matters concerning the conspiracy?
KHODJAYEV: In matters concerning the conspiracy.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, is Faizulla Khodjayev's
evidence correct?
BUKHARIN: It is.
VYSHINSKY (to Rykov): And were you not connected with
Ikramov?
RYKOV: Personally I was not connected with Ikramov.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ikramov, were you a member of the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"?
IKRAMOV: I was connected with the group of Rights through
Bukharin. I may say that I was enlisted by Bukharin. After he
began to slander the Party and Lenin in connection with the national question with regard to the thesis that the backward
countries can attain Socialism with the assistance of the proletariat without passing through the stage of capitalism; he said that
this was a lie, that it was wrong. When he began to speak openly
on the national question, I told him of my bourgeois-nationalist
organization and I formed a bloc with Bukharin in 1933. I spoke
to him after that.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you corroborate Ikramov's evidence?
BUKHARIN.: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Hence the bloc included Trotskyites, Zinovievites, Rights, bourgeois nationalists, Central Asiatic groups,
Byelorussian groups, and, through Grinko, Ukrainian groups.
RYKOV: We just began to make connections with Grinko.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Grinko, were you a member of the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"?
GRINKO: Yes, but I became a member somewhat later, in
1935. I joined as a representative of the Ukrainian national-fascist
organization.
VYSHINSKY: Whom were you connected with?
GRINKO: With Rykov and Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: As you have stated in your evidence?
GRINKO: Yes.
RYKOV: I must say that with regard to Grinko I knew that
he was a Right, I had talks with him, I knew that he represented
- the Ukraine, but I did not know that he was an official representative.
VYSHINSKY: He showed you no credentials?
RYKOV: It· is not a question of credentials . . . .
VYSHINSKY: But you knew Grinko as an old Borotbist,
or didn't you?
182

RYKOV: Of course l knew, and I knew many others, but not
every one of them was a representative of an organization.
VYSHINSKY: Why, did you regard him just as an individual,
as Grinko?
'
RYKOV: I knew that he must be a member of this organization . . . .
VYSHINSKY: That he was not only a member, but a leader
of the organization?
RYKOV: I could suspect what his role was, but I did not know.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to interrogate the
accused Grinko. Accused Grinko, was it a case where he could
only suspect your role as leader of the nationalist organization
in the Ukraine, or was the case different?
GRINKO: Rykov is not telling the truth, because my connection with the centre of Rights and Trotskyites through Rykov
began with my telling him, in one of our conversations, about
the national-fascist organization in the Ukraine, about its desire
to co-operate with the central conspiratorial organizations, and
about the connections of the nationalist fascist organization
with the German and Polish fascists.
: VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, did Grinko speak to you
about the things which he has just now told us?
RYKOV: No, I do not remember.
VYSHINSKY: You do not remember? And you, accused
Grinko, do you affirm this?
GRINKO: l do.
VYSHINSKY: And besides Rykov, with whom else were
you connected?
GRINKO: With Bukharin. Also with Antipov. But my connections with Bukharin did not refer to the work in the Ukraine,
but to the undermining activities which I, 2s a member of the
centre of the bloc, representing the Ukrainian organization, carried on on an all-Union scale.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you corroborate Grinko 's evidence?
BUKHARIN: I knew that he was a member of the bloc, I had
conversations with him, and I also knew that he was in a general
way connected with the nationalist Ukrainian circles. I must
say, since there is some confusion and misunderstanding here
concerning this question: the- point is that the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites" was an organization that had not taken final
shape. It took final shape only in this contact centre. It is therefore quite natural thaL there were no credentials nor representatives in the common organization; one could speak of representatives only with regard to an organized body, but with
regard to the bloc this question did not arise. _
183

VYSHINSKY: I only want to ascertain whether you regarded
Grinko 's part in this common conspiratorial group as that of
one of the leaders of the nationalist Ukrainian organization.
BUKHARIN: When you speak of a "group," do you mean
the entire totality of the organization?
VYSHINSKY: Of course.
BUKHARIN: We did not regard him as a representative, but
we did regard him as a man who, in fact, expressed the corresponding tendencies.
VYSHINSKY: That is, you had in mind that through Grinko
you were dealing with the entire nationalist Ukrainian group?
BUKHARIN: A definite connection was established, he was
a representative, but not in the formal sense, but in the sense
of conveying the tendencies.
VYSHINSKY: It is not a question of representation, but a
question of participation. . . .
BUKHARIN: It was a question of applying in the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites" that complex of ideas, the complex of
those measures which Grinko dragged in his wake.
VYSHINSKY: Is the Prosecution justified in formulating this
point in the following way: the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" in
the broad sense of the word, as we have just spoken of it, which
is accused of having committed a whole series of crimes, as stated
in the indictment, included Trotskyites, Zinovievites, Rights,
bourgeois nationalists in the persons of Ikramov, Khodjayev,
Grinko, Sharangovich and the nationalist groups standing behind
them?
BUKHARIN: If you are referring to the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" in its entirety, and not to the group on top, I think it
is quite right to pose the question the way you do it.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to interrogate Krestinsky.
Accused Krestinsky, do you know that the Trotskyites belonged to the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" of which we are
speaking here?
KRESTINSKY: I learnt from Pyatakov, when he spoke to me
about this in February 1935, that an organization had been formed,
which united the Rights, Trotskyites and military men, and which
set itself the aim of preparing for a military coup. I also knew
that the leading centre included Rykov, Bukharin, Rudzutak
and Yagoda from the Rights, Tukhachevsky and Gamarnik from
the military, and Pyatakov from the Trotskyites. He never told
me that representatives of national-democratic organizations
were included in this centre, and when I was in this centre with
Rosengoltz in 1937, there were no representatives of these organizations in the centre then either.
As for the joining of forces, there is no doubt that this
184

same centre whith united the Rights, the Trotskyites and the military group relied for support on the national-democratic organizations as well, but I did not know what the organizational
form of this combination was.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you confirm that the "bloc of Rights
.and Trotskyites," as an organization of anti-Soviet forces, included
those groups of which the accused Bukharin spoke here, such as
the Rights, Zinovievites, Trotskyites, bourgeois-nationalist groups,
etc.
KRESTINSKY: With regard to the bourgeois-nationalist
groups I am not certain that I could say that they were included
on a basis of equality.
VYSHINSKY: Nor do I say that they were included on a basis
of equality. What has the basis of equality got to do with it?
It was not the League of Nations!
KRESTINSKY: When we speak of the organizational structure . . .
VYSHINSKY: I am not speaking of the organizational structure,
but of the political connections. You say that you learnt it from
Pyatakov, and that you personally . . .
KRESTINSKY: In 1937, when I joined the centre together
with Rosengoltz, after Pyatakov was out, and we were there
for three or four months, we had no personal connections with
them . . . .
VYSHINSKY: Were you personally a member of this contact
centre?
KRESTINSKY: I did not know it by this name.
VYSHINSKY: Each of you called it his own name. But in
essence?
KRESTINSKY: In 1937, after a number of arrests, this cen:.
tre comprised Rosengoltzand myself from the Trotskyites, Rudzutak
and Yagoda from the Rights, and Tukhachevsky and Gamarnik
from the military group.
VYSHINSKY: And where was Rykov?
KRESTINSKY: Rykov had either been arrested or he was
not around. This was not earlier than February 1937.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, when were you arrested?
RYKOV: February 27, 1937.
KRESTINSKY: Personally I was in contact only with Rudzutak, for the contact with Yagoda was maintained by Rudzutak;
we did not meet all together.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you knew about the existence
of this union of anti-Soviet forces not only because Pyatakov
told you; you convinced yourself of it personally?
KRESTINSKY: That is right.
185

VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, proceed.
RYKOV: If we consider that all the other questions have to
a certain extent been exhausted, the main subject now isthequestion of the national republics.
VYSHINSKY: We will specially interrogate Sharangovich,
Khodjayev and the others later on; then we shall speak about it.
in greater detai I.
RYKOV: Of the main subjects, just the subject of the national republics remains.
VYSHINSKY: I want to put some questions with regard to
the bloc and methods of its criminal activity. Did both you and
Bukharin accept a defeatist line, or did Bukharin have a different point of view on this subject?
RYKOV: We gave no explicit formulations, but, in any case,
I know of no existing differences of opinion on this subject. I remember that once, in my presence, Bukharin formulated the idea
of opening the front.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you will tell us about it in greater
detail?
RYKOV: I should prefer to give a general exposition of the
question. The indictment speaks of active and passive methods.
It will be sufficient to enumerate here a number of facts: the
existence of a military group, headed by Tukhachevsky, which was
connected with our centre and which aimed at taking advantage of
a war to overthrow the government. This meant preparing for intervention pure and simple. Our dealings with the Germans,
whicli* we intensified in every way, were meant to stimulate in
every way an armed attack, inasmuch as in this sphere the conspiratorial organization had entered into treasonable relations
with them. Is that an active or a passive method? Among the
important measures this is the sharpest thing that could be thought
of in this form. Take the work in Byelorussia . . . . We had only
Karakhan to maintain connections, while there connections were
maintained through Ulyanov and a number of other persons.
There the relations were much closer and more businesslike than
was the case with Karakhan.
VYSHINSKY: Was there a connection with the Polish intelligence service?
RYKOV: This connection was maintained through the Byelorussian Polish organization and through Ulyanov. The relations
were very close. Contact existed on the question of the so-called
independence of Byelorussia. There was also a number of
other matters, including work carried on by the Byelorussian organization among the Byelorussians in Poland, and the
assistance in this respect was of a mutual kind: the Byelorussian
organization gave assistance to the Pilsudskyites, the Polish
186

fascists, in their work within the Communist Party of Western
Byelorussia, and they in their turn gave their assistance in the
work here. Whether this kind of relations be considered active or
passive, they represented very real preparation.
VYSHINSKY: A plan of treasonable activities?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: At the preliminary investigation you said that
in the negotiations with the Poles you agreed to the severing of Byelorussia from the U.S.S.R. On the basis of what facts
did you say that?
RYKOV: On the basis of the relations with the Byelorussian
organization. I was connected with such of their leaders as Goloded and Chervyakov.
VYSHINSKY: What was your personal line in this question?
RYKOV: This question was duly discussed in the centre, and
all of us, myself, Bukharin and Tomsky, were unanimous that
in case such a national movement did arise we would permit this
secession.
VYSHINSKY: That is, severance?
RYKOV: That is clear, secession or severance. We used milder·
expressions.
VYSHINSKY: You bluntly agreed to such a treasonable act
as the severance of Byelorussia from the U.S.S.R. for Poland?
RYKOV: To its independence. Byelorussia was supposed to
come under the protectorate of Poland.
VYSHlNSKY: As a vassal. (To Bukharin.) Accused Bukharin,
do you agree with Rykov on this question?
BUKHARIN: I must say that Rykov's memory is failing
him here.
VYSHINSKY: Did you,)ike Rykov, maintain a defeatist position?
BUKHARIN: No, but I am responsible for this affair.
VYSHINSKY: That you are responsible-that is a different
matter. I must establish the fact: did you discuss with Rykov and
Tomsky the question of opening the front?
BUKHARIN: I did, not with Rykov, but with Tomsky.
VYSHINSKY: What about?
BUKHARIN: This refers . . .
VYSHINSKY: It is of no consequence, when and why; that
is a different question.
BUKHARIN: I had a conversation with Tomsky; he spoke
about the idea of opening the front.
VYSHINSKY: There was a conversation with Tomsky about
opening the front. Opening the front to whom?
BUKHARIN:Jgainst the U.S.S.R.
187

VYSHINSKY: Opening the front to whom?
BUKHARIN: To Germany.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, there was talk of opening the front to
Germany.
BUKHARIN: It was a question of our attitude. I want to
say that no instructions were worked out during this conversation.
VYSHINSKY: About instructions later.
I am speaking of facts, such as took place. You confirm that
you discussed it with Tomsky, that in case of necessity the front
was to be opened.
BUKHARIN: I do not recall that.
VYSH INS KY: And do you, accused Rykov, recall it?
RYKOV: Of course, to open the front in case of war.
VYSH INS KY (to Bukharin): So you did not object.
BUKHARIN: It is self-understood that horses eat oats.
You say: what does it mean, opening the front to the enemy?
Tomsky said that that was his opinion, but I objected.
VYSHINSKY: Wait a while, it still remains to be seen how
you objected. We want to establish what actually happened. So
Tomsky told you that it would be necessary or expedient to open
the front?
BUKHARIN: Yes, he inclined to this opinion.
VYSHINSKY: That it would be expedient to open the front
to the Germans in case of war?
BUKHARIN: Yes, in case of war.
VYSHINSKY: And what does this mean?
BUKHARIN: It means high treason.
VYSHINSKY: And as to how to open the front, who spoke
to you about that?
BUKHARIN: Tomsky spoke about it, that there was such
an opinion among the military men.
VYSHINSKY: Which military men?
BUKHARIN: The Right conspirators.
VYSHINSKY: Concretely, who?
BUKHARIN: He named Tukhachevsky, and Kork, if I am
not mistaken; then the Trotskyites.
VYSHINSKY: That means that Kork, Tukhachevsky and
the Trotskyites generally intended to open the front in case of
war with Germany, and it was of this that Tomsky spoke to you?
BUKHARIN: Yes, that there was such an opinion among
·
them.
VYSHINSKY: An opinion or a plan?
BUKHARIN: I would not say a plan. Perhaps it was a plan,
but in a very cursory conversation.
188

VYSHINSKY: And was Tukhachevsky a member of this group?
BUKHARIN: I have already explained. . . .
VYSHINSKY: I am asking: Were Tukhachevsky and the
military group of conspirators members of your bloc?
BUKHARIN: They were.
VYSHINSKY: And they discussed with the members of the
bloc?
BUKHARIN: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: When members of a bloc discuss such things,
it may be said that it is a plan.
BUKHARIN: It becomes a plan when all the i's are dotted.
VYSHINSKY: Can it be said that Tomsky dotted the i's?
BUKHARIN: It can.
VYSHINSKY: So that is established. And you were opposed
to this?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I was opposed.
VYSHINSKY: And your opinion, accused Rykov? Can it be
said that Bukharin accepted the standpoint of defeat of the
U.S.S.R.?
RYKOV: I only want to tell of what actually occurred in my
presence. (To Bukharin.) It is from you I first heard the term
"opening the front."
VYSHINSKY: And what exactly was it that you heard?
RYKOV: That is what I want to tell. Perhaps it was a continuation of a previous discussion or conversation with Tomsky,
I do not at all exclude this possibility; but we were there, the
three of us-you, Tomsky and myself-and then you expressed
the idea that in case the front is opened it will be necessary, in
order to forestall seizure of power by the military group, to adopt
definite measures against a military dictatorship.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): Is that true?
BUKHARIN: That is true.
RYKOV: That is to say, that at that time Bukharin, in my
presence, discussed the question of how to avoid in case of the
front being opened . . .
VYSHINSKY: With whom did he discuss it?
RYKOV: I say there were Tomsky, Bukharin and myself.
There was nobody else. He discussed the question of how to avoid
the danger of Napoleonism, of a military dictatorship, in case
of the front being opened.
VYSHINSKY: And whom did you suspect of this Napoleonism?
RYKOV: I do not remember. The question was discussed
in general terms. The leader of the military group was Tukhai;hevsky. I cannot say whether his name was mentioned or not.
189

VYSHINSKY: In a word, you were apprehensive lest Tukhachevsky imagine himself a Napoleon?
RYKOV: I set forth what Bukharin said. That was the
first time I heard the term "opening the front." I say I heard it
when Bukharin expounded this and therefore I said in my
deposition that before that I had not heard, I had not come across
this idea, and I had not spoken of it to Tomsky. I said that in
this respect Bukharin adopted an extreme position, because I first
heard the words "opening the front" from Bukharin, and exactly
in .the sense which I have here explained. When he spoke,
he said not a word to the effect that there were scoundrels who
wanted to open the front, or similar things; there was not a word
said to this effect.
VYSHINSKY: And what about Bukharin? Was he in favour
of it?
RYKOV: He spoke about this calmly: in case of the front
being opened, that is, in order to avoid such danger, something
or other has to be done. But if one raises the question that it wi II
be necessary to adopt some measures in order to avoid a definite
danger, one speaks of it only if one considers the consummation
of the thing itself admissible.
VYSHINSKY: Correct.
RYKOV: Therefore my impression was that at any rate Bukharin considers it permissible.
VYSHINSKY: Correct.
RYKOV: According to my opinion, this cannot be understood
or interpreted in any other way.
VYSHINSKY: May I ask you this: did Bukharin pursue a defeatist line in this question?
RYKOV: This is too elementary. ·
VYSHINSKY: There are elementary things which it will do
no harm to repeat. Yes or no?
RYKOV: Of course, yes.
VYSHINSKY: May we say that Bukharin's standpoint was
that of defeat for the U.S.S.R.?
RYKOV: Knowing Bukharin as I do, I should say that perhaps he did not consider it the only thing, but he considered
it as something that could be discussed, something that could
be realized under definite conditions.
VYSHINSKY: I do not say the only thing possible, but
one of the means-to open the gates ·to the enemy. Is that
correct?
RYKOV: Yes, but as something possible, not indispensable.
VYSHINSKY: Of course, as something possible, not indispensable; that is to say, this was not the only road along which
he was pursuing his aim. Isn't that treason?
190

RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Do you consider Bukharin a traitor?
RYKOV: A traitor, like myself.
VYSHINSKY: Do you corroborate the evidence you gave
before the Procurator of the U.S.S.R.? (Reads.) " ... as for our
defeatist position, Bukharin shared it fully."
RYKOV: I must introduce a correction: he was the first to
discuss it in my presence.
VYSHINSKY: Of course not in your absence.
RYKOV: But in general he discussed it with somebody before he spoke to me.
VYSHINSKY: If we consider you, Bukharin and Tomsky
the centre of the Right section of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," from whom in this centre did you first hear about the necessity of a preliminary agreement between your orga;iization
and foreign states?
RYKOV: I was just as much a member of the centre as he,
and if such things were spoken of in my presence and I did not
hand that person over to you, then I must answer for it.
VYSHINSKY: You are trying here to pose as a person of
noble mind; but how was it in actual fact: did he speak to you
or did you speak to him?
RYKOV: I wrote of this, I did not think it would be this way.
VYSHINSKY: But you said that he was the first to discuss
it in your presence. Consequently, it was not you who spoke to
him but he who spoke to you. Is that correct?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: But both of you are responsible for this in an
equal degree. He spoke to you. Was the initiative yours, or
Bukharin's?
RYKOV: The initiative of introducing the subject?
VYSHINSKY: Yes.
RYKOV: That is so.
VYSHINSKY: Further: "He assumed an extremely favourable
attitude towards the information concerning the negotiations with
the German fascist circles." Do yol! corroborate this?
RYKOV: Yes, yes.
VYSHINSKY: Do you corroborate this?
RYKOV! Yes. Permit me to introduce more exactitude. The
favourable attitude consisted in the fact that when we discussed
the question of a rapprochement with the Germans, of avoiding
war with them, Bukharin proposed that we make a number of
concessions.
VYSHINSKY: Further: "As for our defeatist position, Bukharin shared it fully." Do you corroborate this?
RYKOV: Yes.
191

VYSHINSKY: "And he spoke in favour of this position even
in sharper terms than we." Who is "we"?
RYKOV: I had Tomsky and myself in mind. I am referring
to the question of opening the front. We did not discuss in detail
how to avoid one thing, another, or a third.
VYSHINSKY: Further: " . . . and as a defeatist he spoke
even in sharper terms than we."
RYKOV: It might perhaps be better here to change the formulation. I do not want to appear better in this respect than he.
We are the same.
VYSHINSKY: These are your motives. But what about the
facts?
RYKOV: They were the same as the motives, because I absolutely . . .
VYSHINSKY: Facts cannot be the same as motives. Facts
are facts. You want to make Bukharin's position easier in connection with this question.
RYKOV: It is not that I want to make it easier for him, but
I do not want to make it easier for myself at Bukharin's expense.
VYSHINSKY: During the preliminary investigation, did you
state the truth or not?
RYKOV: Of course I stated the truth. I think that everybody understands that I am a sufficiently grown-up and experienced man and know how to make such differentiations. Suppose
I did say one thing or another. I am older than he and my
responsibility is not lessened or mitigated.
VYSHINSKY: May I put the question differently? Did
Bukharin speak in favour of this position, of the defeatist position,
as you say, in sufficiently sharp terms, in just as sharp terms as
you?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And further: "He made the proposal and
formulated the idea of opening the front to the Germans in case
of war.''
RYKOV: It is here that I must add that he thus formulated
in my presence the question of the danger of seizure of power.
VYSHINSKY: Do you corroborate this?
RYKOV: Yes.
,
VYSHINSKY: Thus, when Bukharin says that he was opposed
to the defeatist position, is he right or not?
RYKOV: Here I did not understand Bukharin, and do not
understand him. The main thing is that a man of politics answers
for his actions and for the results of his political actions. This is
the one thing that must be demanded both of me and of him, and
not at all the way he thinks. Then it will be of interest.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions to the accused Rykov.

192

THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rykov, in your depositions
dealing with the work of the organization of the Rights in Byelorussia you noted that in fact your organization of the Rights
in Byelorussia turned into an espionage agency of the Polish
General Staff. Is that right?
RYKOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: And further you stated in the same deposition that your organization of the Rights in Byelorussia
received the same kind of instructions from the Polish General
Staff, on the one hand, and on the other hand, from the centre of
the Rights. How are we to understand this?
RYKOV: In what sense the same kind?
THE PRESIDENT: As regards wrecking work, that it was
necessary to bring about a decrease in the number of livestock.
RYKOV: Even more than that. These instructions, as Goloded
said, were duly received from the Poles. I do not recall that he
spoke of having received these instructions from the centre.
THE PRESIDENT: But the instructions which your organization in Byelorussia was receiving from the Poles coincided with
the instructions given by your centre?
RYKOV: I do not remember what instructions were given;
in any event, I gave no instructions.
THE PRESIDENT: Did your centre give instructions with
regard to wrecking in the sphere of agriculture, in the sphere
of livestock raising?
RYKOV: No. No instructions were given in this sphere.
THE PRESIDENT: But if organizations which are subordinate
to you receive instructions from the Polish intelligence service
to engage in wrecking activities in the sphere of livestock raising,
and, particularly, with regard to bringing about a decrease in
the number of horses, and to perpetrate other acts of diversion,
and if you know about it, how is it to be understood?
RYKOV: How is it to be understood? It is one of the elements
of treason. I used to receive information after the damage had been
done. I am gui Ity of covering up these acts. In any case the organizations of this type were large organizations, and they decided things on their own.
THE PRES ID ENT: In the same deposition you say that "in
Byelorussia the organizations of the Rights had set the task to turn
Byelorussia into a base for an offensive by the Poles for the purpose of severing Byelorussia from the U.S.S.R. in the interests
of Poland. These instructions of ours coincided with identical
instructions which the Byelorussian organizations received from
the Polish General Staff."
RYKOV: This is an unfortunate expression.
THE PRESIDENT: Why unfortunate? It is exactly what it
13

193

says in the record of your deposition: "our instructions coincided
with the instructions of the Polish GeneralStaff."Thisfollowsfrom
your depositions and such is the conclusion. During your deposition
you said in reply to a question: "as a result the organization of the
Rights in Byelorussia actually turned into an espionage agency
of the Polish General Staff."
RYKOV: This is correct. But there is a certain aspect here
which consists in the fact that, besides the Right centre, besides
fascist Poland, there were the Byelorussian nationalist organizations.
THE PRESIDENT: You were referring to the organization
of the Rights.
RYKOV: These nationalist organizations had their own opinion, their Ii ne, their theses and their decisions.
THE PRESIDENT: You stated in your deposition: "Our
instructions coincided with the instructions of the Polish General
Staff." Here we must understand it to refer to the instructions
of the centre-of Bukharin, Rykov, Tomsky.
RYKOV: When I wrote this, my object was to give a characterization of the ultimate political result.
THE PRESIDENT: The result was that your organizations
in Byelorussia turned into an espionage agency of the Polish General Staff.
RYKOV: This is the formulation of the political results and
not of very definite organizational relations.
THE PRESIDENT: Did your organizations of the Rights
in Byelorussia engage in wrecking work in agriculture and in
road-building on the instructions of the Polish General Staff?
RYKOV: I learnt of two cases from Goloded: one referred to
the horses, the other referred to cows.
THE PRESIDENT: Why was it necessary for the Polish intelligence service to give instructions to carry out wrecking activities in road-building?
RYKOV: Apparently, this was done in order to impede the
movement of our troops to defend the borders of the Soviet state.
THE PRESIDENT: How did you conceive of the role of your
organization of the Rights in Byelorussia in respect of bringing
about disintegration in the revolutionary movement of Western
Bye lorussia?
RYKOV: I have already explained this. I said that there
was an exchange of services between our Byelorussian organization and the fascists. At the request of the Poles the counter-revolutionary Byelorussians sent people to Poland to work in the
Polish Communist organizations in the spirit of the Byelorussian
organization.
194

THE PRESIDENT: For what purpose were people sent? For
work as agents-provocateurs, or for some other work?
RYKOV: The Poles, of course, used them for provocatory
purposes, but this was hardly their immediate task.
They wanted at the same time to bring about the disintegration of the revolutionary movement among the Byelorussians,
the disintegration of the Communist Party there, in order to set
up in its place a Byelorussian organization which would set itself not only and not so much the aim of espionage as definite
political aims.
THE PRESIDENT: Is it or is it not a fact that the organization of the Rights planted agents-provocateurs in the Communist
organizations abroad, in Western Byelorussia?
RYKOV. That is true.
THE PRESIDENT: If you have stated that the organization
of the Rights on the territory of Byelorussia was, as you say, an
espionage agency of the Polish General Staff, what then can be
said of the organization of the Rights on the territory of the Ukraine? Whose espionage agency or the organ of which General
Staff was that organizatiog?
RYKOV: I do not know exactly what the relations were there.
I had no detailed conversations on this subject. But, in my opinion, the situation must have been analogous to what it was in
Byelorussia, that is to say, that it was an espionage agency of
German-Polish fascism.
THE PRESIDENT: Thus, your organization on the territory
of the Ukraine was in actual fact an organization of GermanPolish fascism?
RYKOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Your organization in the Northern Territory was also an agency of the intelligence service of a foreign
state?
RYKOV: (No reply.)
THE PRESIDENT: You heard the evidence given by Ivanov?
RYKOV: As regards his espionage work?
THE PRESIDENT: Yes, and as regards possible concessions
of timber and sawmills to British capitalists.
RYKOV: I heard that.
THE PRESIDENT: Do you agree with it? Was it so? At
least, did Ivanov get such plans from your centre?
RYKOV: I did not know of that and gave no such instructions. At least ...
THE PRESIDENT: Tell us, what kind of conversation did
you have with Yenukidze as to the necessity of murdering Maxim
Gorky?
RYKOV: I ..•
13*

195

VYSHINSKY: Permit me to request that this be postponed until
the time when we clear up this entire episode, since one question
will hardly bring out anything, inasmuch as this question is
linked up with quite a number of other questions. I would ask
that this be postponed until we clear up the whole matter.
RYKOV: That is why I did not touch ...
THE PRESIDENT: Tell us, accused Rykov, when you gave
your evidence about the work of the organization of the Rights
in the North Caucasus, did you mention that you had dealings
with a whiteguard Cossack organization?
RYKOV: Alongside with things of secondary importance I
failed to mention here one essential matter, the question of the
Cossacks, of the Cossack organization of the Rights, which was
formed there. It began to be formed in the period of I 930-31.
Subsequently, Pivovarov informed me about the organization
of the work in the Cossack organization.
It took final shape approximately in 1934, when Larin was
at the head of it ....
THE PRESIDENT: I am interested in the nature of the connections which this organization had.
RYKOV: Of all the organizations this was probably the most
extreme Right organization. In addition to Cossacks it included
returned emigres who, as Pivovarov told us, maintained their
connections with the remnants of the Cossack armies which remained
abroad, and in their work they received aid from those Cossack
White armies. Through them and with them conversations were
carried on to the effect that if an insurrection should take place
in Central Asia, these same remnants of Cossack organizations
abroad even promised the assistance of a landing party. This
is what I learnt from Pivovarov about the Cossack organizations.
THE PRESIDENT: And who was to make up the intended
landing party, White emigres?
RYKOV: I said-the remnants of the Cossack White armies
abroad.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): If you will permit, I have two
questions to ask Krestinsky in connection with the evidence given
by the accused Rykov.
Accused Krestinsky, tell us, please, what do you know of the
participation of the Tukhachevsky group in_ the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyi tes "?
KRESTINSKY: I know the fol1ow1ng about Tukhachevsky's
participation. When I met Trotsky in Meranin October 1933, he pointed out to me that in orientating ourselves on a coup d'etat, we
should under no circumstances rely for support solely on our
Trotskyite forces, because their numbers were not sufficient for
this purpose, but that we must come to an agreement both with
196

the Rights and with the military group. He paid particular
attention to Tukhachevsky, a man with an adventurous bent who
lays claim to the first place in the army and would probably be
ready to take many chances. He asked me to convey this opinion
of his to Pyatakov and to talk with Tukhachevsky personally.
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk to Tukhachevsky?
KRESTINSKY: I had a talk with him in the beginning of
1934, after Pyatakov had spoken to him, and I told him of my
talk with Trotsky. Tukhachevsky said that in principle he
was favourably disposed not only to the joining of forces but also to
the fact that such a task was being posed. But the question, he
said, requires deliberation, the possibilities have to be established,
and after that he would come to an understanding with Pyatakov on this subject. I found out from Pyatakov in February 1935
that an understanding had been reached, but I did not ask Pyatakov when the understanding was reached and when exactly this
centre came into being. Subsequently I spoke to Tukhachevsky
several times on this subject. This was in the second half of 1935,
in 1936 and in 1937. I carried on such conversations on more than
one occasion. During one of the conversations in 1935 he mentioned
several people, on whose support he relied. He mentioned,
among others, Yakir, Uborevich, Kork and Eid·emann. During
another conversation later on, a very important conversation
which took place at the Extraordinary Eighth Congress of Soviets, Tukhachevsky urged the necessity of hastening the
coup. The point was that we had linked up the coup with
our defeatist orientation and timed it for the beginning of war,
when Germany would attack the Soviet Union. But as this attack
was being delayed, so was the practical consummation of the
coup being delayed. At that period the gradual smashing up of
the counter-revolutionary forces had begun. Pyatakov and Radek
had been arrested, arrests of Trotskyites had begun, and Tukhachevsky began to fear that if this business were further
delayed it would spell ruin for the entire undertaking. Therefore
he raised the question of hastening the counter-revolutionary
action. We discussed the matter with Gamarnik and Rudzutak,
and came to the conclusion that Tukhachevsky was right. After
that I asked in writing through Bessonov for Trotsky's opinion
and received from him an answer in the affirmative. All these
questions which are connected with Tukhachevsky, Trotsky, and
so on-is it worth bringing them out here?
VYSH INS KY: I am satisfied with your answer.
Accused Rosengoltz, do you corroborate this part of Krestinsky's
evidence?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, I do.

197

VYSHINSKY: Did you have occasion to speak to Tukhachevsky
and Kre.stinsky?
ROSENGOLTZ: In the end of March 1937 I discussed with
Krestinsky the question of hastening the organization of the
coup.
VYSHINSKY: You will speak of this in detail during your
examination. At present I have no more questions to you.
I have one question to ask the accused Chernov. Accused
Chernov, I should like to dwell on your connection with the correspondent of the "Berliner Tageblatt," Paul Scheffer. You spoke
of it yesterday. Under what circumstances did you establish
contact with him? Did he visit you, or did you find him?
CHERNOV: I spoke of this yesterday. I repeat: they called
me up from the Information Bureau of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs and told me that I was to receive the
correspondent of the "Berliner Tageblatt," Paul Scheffer, and
give him information of a non-confidential character for use in
the press. This was in the spring of 1929.
VYSHINSKY: Not 1930?
CHERNOV: No, 1929.
VYSHINSKY: Yesterday, I think, you said 1930.
CHERNOV: That must be a misunderstanding. If I said that
it was in 1930, it was a slip of the tongue.
VYSHINSKY: Did you meet him once or several times?
CHERNOV: Several times in the course of 1929, until the
connection with him broke.
VYSHlNSKY: And what caused the connection to break?
CHERNOV: He said he was afraid of being exposed and was
leaving the Soviet Union. I cannot say exactly when it waseither towards the end of 1929 or in 1930; rather, I would say,
it was in 1929.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps Krestinsky remembers?
KRESTINSKY: I think that Scheffer left the Soviet Union
before my return from Berlin.
CHERNOV: That is what I say.
VYSHINSKY: You say either towards the end of 1929 or
the beginning of 1930.
CHERNOV: During the preliminary investigation I stated
both the period I was meeting Scheffer and the period when the
connection broke.
VYSHINSKY: During the preliminary investigation you
stated over your signature, on p. 45 of Volume VIII: at the end
of 1929, or perhaps in 1930, Scheffer left the U.S.S.R. and the
connection broke.
CHERNOV: Apparently, it was a slip of the tongue, or I was
nervous.

VYSHINSKY: In any event, you remember that he left soon
after this. Did you have a talk with him about his leaving?
CHERNOV: I did.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: The Court is adjourned until 11 a.m.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER
Military Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, MARCH 4, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
We shall proceed to examine the accused Sharangovich.
Accused Sharangovich, do you confirm the testimony you
gave at the preliminary investigation?
SHARANGOVICH: I confirm it fully. I would like to tell
the Court fully and sincerely of my treasonable and treacherous
crimes. I request to be allowed the opportunity to do so in accordance with the plan I have in mind.
THE PRESIDENT (to the Procurator): The accused wants
to give his account in a connected form.
VYSHINSKY: It is his right to do so.
THE PRESIDENT (to Sharangovich): Briefly, please. Deal
with the principal phases of your criminal activities.
SHARANGOVICH: I became a traitor to my country in August
1921, and remained a traitor until my arrest. In August 1921,
after peace was concluded with Poland, I was returning from
a Polish prison under an exchange arrangement, as a hostage,
together with a group of convicted men. I stopped in Warsaw.
In Warsaw we were called in turn to the Soviet Embassy to give
particulars about ourselves. A certain Vnorovsky-1 cannot
say exactly what his official· position was-was working at the
time in the Soviet Embassy.
VYSHINSKY: What was his first name?
SHARANGOVICH: I do not know his name and patronymic.
I had three conversations with this Vnorovsky. I do not want ...
Not that I do not want, but I do not consider it necessary to
recount the details of these conversations, but the gist of them
was that Vnorovsky told me that the Poles did not want -to
let me out of the country, and that they could do so only if
I consented to work for the Polish intelligence service. I gave
my consent, and after that I was sent to the Soviet Union by
the Polish intelligence service. Upon my arrival in Minsk I was
put by this same Vnorovsky in contact with Bogutsky, the responsible resident agent of the Polish intelligence service, who

200

then occupied an important post in Byelorussia. Our conversation with Bogutsky did not last long. I did not have to
be recruited again, because Bogutsky was fully acquainted with
all my conversations with Vnorovsky and with the fact that I
had given my consent, having learnt it from Vnorovsky. Bogutsky
and I therefore came to an understanding, and he then told me
that if later any definite services should be required of me, or if it
should be necessary to give me any commissions, he would let
me know. However, I received no definite commissions from
Bogutsky for a year or two. Bogutsky left Byelorussia in 1923
and before his departure connected me with Slavinsky, the
responsible Polish resident agent, who also at that time held
a fairly important post in Byelorussia. Slavinsky, of course, was
very well acquainted with all these details, both as regards the
fact that I had been recruited by Vnorovsky and as regards the
understanding I had with Bogutsky. Slavinsky did give me commissions. Of course, I cannot now recall all the details of these
commissions. I worked in Byelorussia then from the middle of
1923 to the middle of 1924 as senior assistant to the Procurator
of the Republic. Many cases, espionage and others, more important
ones, passed through my hands. On Slavinsky's instructions
I kept him informed of the nature of these cases and of the persons involved.
Next, at the end of 1924, I went to work in the trade unions,
so that this commission of Slavinsky's terminated. I received
no commissions from Slavinsky while in the trade unions. In
1925 Slavinsky left Byelorussia. In the early part of 1926 I left
Byelorussia for Siberia and my connections with the Polish intelligence service were temporarily suspended. I of course remained
an agent of the Polish intelligence service, but I received no definite commissions.
This connection was resumed-and in a more active form
than before-at the end of 1932 or at the beginning of 1933;
specifically, with the consul of one of the foreign states bordering
on Byelorussia. This was already after I had joined the nationalfascist anti-Soviet organization in Byelorussia.
It happened in this way. A certain Zhebrovsky, who then
occupied the post of Third Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of Byelorussia, addressed me, but the
conversation we had was more in the nature of a sounding.
I had a more definite conversation on the subject with Benek,
who was then People's Commissar of Agriculture of Byelorussia.
In the name of this consul, Benek made the following proposal.
He said that although this consul had fairly close connections
with a number of persons belonging to the leadership of the
national-fascist organization in Byelorussia, including himself,
201

Benek, he nevertheless wanted to establish similar connections
with me, in view of the fact that I was engaged in Party work.
I must say that as a matter of fact it did not require much
persuasionat the time to recruit me or any persuasion at all, because
I was already one of the leaders of the national-fascist organization
in Byelorussia and because I was already aware of the close connections of other leaders of the national-fascist organization in Bye lorussia with the Poles, such as Goloded, Chervyakov and Benek himself.
In general, my whole past and my connections with the Poles
led me into this bosom, so to speak, without any persuasion
whatever.
At that time I transmitted through Benek the contents of
certain decisions of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. regarding Byelorussia. Then I supplied information about highways,
about the network of Party nuclei, and on a number of political
questions. But the point, of course, is not only what I transmitted,
and not only my personal connections, but chiefly that already
at that period our national-fascist organization, one of whose
leaders I was, was actually very closely connected with the Polish General Staff. Of this I should like to speak at greater length
after I have dealt with questions connected with the nationalfascist organization.
I had been enlisted into the national-fascist organization by
Goloded and Chernyshevich at the beginning of 1932. I will not
dwell on the circumstances of these connections, nor on what induced me to join this organization, because it naturally follows
from what I have already said. I was a member of this nationalfascist organization, and this is what I had been striving for.
As to the circumstances under which I was recruited or drawn
into the organization, it seems to me that I need scarcely speak
of them here.
When I joined the national-fascist organization, it was,
it seems, in March or at the end of February, I . . .
VYSHINSKY: What year?
SHARANGOVICH: 1932. Goloded informed me in detail of
the composition of this organization and of the fact that this
national-fascist organization was connected with the Moscow
centre of the Rights and was receiving instructions from it, from
Rykov and Bukharin personally. Goloded briefly formulated the
principal aims of the national-fascist organization in Byelorus~ia
as follows: the overthrow of the Soviet power and the restoration
of capitalism, and the severance of Byelorussia from the Soviet
Union, in the event of a war with fascist states.
As to the ways and means, they included wrecking, diversion
and terrorism.
I must stress the point that already at that time Goloded in202

formed me of these instructions of the Moscow centre of the Rights,
which were being received from Rykov and Bukharin.
Goloded emphasized in particular the necessity, for the purpose of achieving these aims, of establishing close connections
with the Polish General Staff. And, as a matter of fact, this
quite clearly followed from the aims which were set.
I do not want to say that in accepting these instructions, carrying them out, and guiding ourselves by them, we, including
myself, were infants and did not understand their significance,
and, so to speak, did not realize the full seriousness of the treacherous and criminal aims, ways and means of which I am speaking. However, I must state that such lines existed. I must
in passing develop, if I may so put it, why we called ourselves national-fascists. The fact of the matter is that both the
principal members of the centre and the principal cadres were
nationalists. Of course, both within the centre and among the
cadres there were Rights and Trotskyites, but no line of demarcation could be drawn between them, nor even, if you like, could
there be any talk of a bloc; for if you took any of us, the principal
leaders of this centre, he was both a Right and, first and foremost,
a nationalist. If you take such people as Zhebrovsky, for example,
who was an active Trotskyite, on all questions concerning aims
and objects he was more emphatic than we were. If you take Gikalo,
who was a Right, he was not less emphatic on nationalist questions
than we were and agreed with the aims which we set ourselves.
I must therefore say that, essentially, the nationalists formed
the main group, which was gathering around itself all the cadres and
forces for a fight against the Soviet power and for the overthrow
of the Soviet power. I must say that our connections with the
Moscow centre of the Rights were not theoretical and formal, or
even anything in the nature of a local -bloc. To this effect we
received systematic directions and instructions from the Moscow
centre of the Rights. I want to corroborate this by a number of
facts.
In November 1932, Goloded and Chervyakov went to Moscow.
There they met Rykov and Bukharin. I want to add that, as far
as I know, Chervyakov bad been connected with Rykov since
1928, and Goloded since 1930. I remember that after Goloded
and Chervyakov had been to Moscow in 1932, when they returned,
a meeting of all the members of our centre was held in Minsk,
at which they reported to us. They said in substance that both
Rykov and Bukharin had confirmed all the earlier lines for
our organization, but had expressed dissatisfaction with its
feeble activities. In Moscow, a number of concrete lines had
been given, firstly in respect to wrecking and diversive activities, and secondly in respect to strengthening and establishing
203

closer connection with the Polish General Staff. After this Goloded
and Chervyakov met Rykov and Bukharin regularly.
Apart from the connections to which I have already referred,
I personally had established connections first with Sulimov, I
think it was in October 1932, when he visited Byelorussia as the
representative of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. and of
the Council of People's Commissars of the U.S.S.R. with regard
to potato shipments. Already at that time I had a lengthy conversation with Sulimov. Sulimov informed me of what I had already learnt from Goloded and Chervyakov; I told him about
our cadres and about what our organization was doing. I did not
meet Sulimov any more after this. But in the spring of 1933 I
formed connections with Antipov. Goloded arranged my first
meeting with Antipov in his own office. During this meeting Antipov inquired at first about the activities of our organization and
confirmed the lines which were already known to me. During
this conversation I put certain questions to Antipov, and did so
not for the reason that I disagreed with him, or that I required
any particular explanations, but for the purpose of getting them
confirmed by Antipov himself, because when these conversations
were being arranged Goloded had told me that Antipov was the
leader of the parallel group of the Rights. During this conversation
I asked Antipov what his opinion was of the outspoken and sharply
defined line to establish connections with the Polish Genera 1
Staff. To this Antipov replied as follows: "Don't you see, if
we are setting out to overthrow the Soviet power, if we are setting
out to achieve the defeat of the Soviet Union in the event of a
war with fascist states, if we are setting out to secure the severance of Byelorussia, what else can we do but uti Iize and come to
an agreement with such a real force as fascist Poland?"
The second question I put to Antipov was the severance of
Byelorussia and the creation of a Byelorussian bourgeois state
under the protectorate, so to speak, of Poland. We, of course, all
realized what this protectorate would mean, because we did not
in any way regard it as a theoretical formula. It would mean
placing Soviet Byelorussia under the yoke of the Polish landlords
and capitalists, employing aII the means which we already possessed
at that time. To this Antipov replied that this formula would
better enable us to weld together all the nationalist and antiSoviet cadres, and, secondly, by this formula we would at the
same time lure, if I may put it so, the Polish General Staff. That
was our first meeting. I should say that in 1933 Anti pov visited
Byelorussia fairly often, because he was the chairman of the commission for purging the Party organization of Byelorussia.
At the second meeting with Antipov Goloded, Chervyakov,
Gikalo and myself were present. The meeting took place in a
204

country house near Minsk. Having heard our reports on the criminal and subversive activities of our organization, Antipov again
demanded greater activity from us, especially in wrecking and
diversion, in the organization of terrorist groups and in the matter
of connections with the Polish General Staff.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us in greater detail of your criminal activities in the matter of wrecking.
SHARANGOVICH: I shall come to that.
VYSHINSKY: You are taking a long time coming to it, and
it is what interests me most. Deal concretely with your own
wrecking activities. We shall come to your espionage connections
later. For the present tell us, please, about your criminal activities in the matter of wrecking, what tasks you set out to perform,
how you performed them, and so on.
SHARANGOVICH: We set ourselves the task of developing
most widespread wrecking activities in all spheres of economic
life.
VYSHINSKY: With what purpose?
SHARANGOVICH: With the purpose of paving the way for
the defeat of the U.S.S.R. and of rousing discontent among the
population of the country.
VYSHINSKY: With the purpose of provocation?
SHARANGOVICH: Of course. There was the purpose of undermining defence capacity. According to the division of tasks
among us, I specifically engaged in wrecking activities in the
sphere of agriculture.
VYSHINSKY: We shall not speak for the present of the division of tasks. You tell me this. These tasks of undermining
the might of the Byelorussian republic, weakening defence
capacity, bringing about conditions most favourable for an attack
by the enemies-did your Byelorussian group set itself these
tasks independently, or were they set by somebody else?
SHARANGOVICH: These tasks were set and formulated in
the general plan of wrecking activities, but they were also specifically set by the Moscow centre of the Rights, by Rykov and
Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: And were they set by anybody else?
SHARANGOVICH: By the Polish intelligence service.
VYSHINSKY: And so you worked simultaneously under the
leadership of the Right centre and under the leadership of the
Polish intelligence service?
SHARANGOVICH: Correct.
VYSHINSKY: What specific form did your criminal activities take?
SHARANGOVICH: I engaged in wrecking activities chiefly
in the sphere of agriculture. In 1932 we, and I personally, devel205

oped extensive wrecking work in this sphere. Firstly, by slowing
down the pace of collectivization.
VYSHINSKY: What post did you occupy at the time?
SHARANGOVICH: I was Second Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party of Byelorussia.
VYSHINSKY: So that your opportunities were extensive?
SHARANGOVICH: Of course. I personally gave wrecking
instructions to a number of people ....
VYSHINSKY: Your accomplices?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes, my accomplices. \·:e organized withdrawals of members from collective farms. Then we muddled up
the sowing areas. In essence it was setting a district a sowing
area it could not possibly cope with, while, on the contrary,
other districts, with large areas of land, would be set reduced
plans. Furthermore, we arranged for the undermining of the grain
collection plans. In 1932 this was done as follows. At first our
national-fascist organization did everything in its power to hamper
the grain collections, that is, we frustrated them. Then, when
the Central Committee of the C.P.S. U. adopted a special decision
on the progress of the grain collections in Byelorussia, our
organization, fearing failure and possible exposure, adopted urgent
measures to improve the grain collections somewhat.
I must also say that in 1932 we took measures to spread
plague among pigs, which resulted ina high pig mortality; this was
done by inoculating pigs against plague in a wrecking fashion.
VYSHINSKY: On your personal instructions?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes, there were my personal instructions
also.
VYSHINSKY: It is your criminal activities that interest me.
SHARANGOVICH: I repeat, there were my instructions and
those of others.
In addition to this, we formed state farms in the republic at
the expense of the land of the collective farmers and individual
peasants.
VYSHINSKY: In detriment to the interests of the collective
farmers and individual peasants?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes, of course.
VYSHINSKY: With what purposes?
SHARANGOVICH: Wrecking purposes, criminal purposes, in
order to create discontent.
VYSHINSKY: Provocative purposes?
SHARANGOVICH: Somewhat later we carried on wrecking
activities in the sphere of agriculture in connection with the assignment of household land to the collective farmers.
I must particularly deal with the question of the individual
peasants, because this was connected with the plans of our national206

fascist organization. At that period there were still about 100,000
individual peasants in Byelorussia. We gave it out that an individual peasant who failed to join the collective farm was an enemy
of the Soviet power. This was done for provocative purposes; in
accordance with our provocative stand, we applied to the individual peasants who resisted collectivization such taxation measures which caused discontent and an. insurrectionary spirit among
the individual peasants.
VYSHINSKY: Do you remerpber the Lepel affair?
SHARANGOVICH: I connect all this, as a matter of fact, with
the Lepel affair. The Lepe! affair, if I may so express it, was
simply a link in the chain of our undermining work.
VYSHINSKY: So the Lepe! affair was the consequence of your
deliberate criminal and provocational activity?
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: What form did it take specifically?
SHARANGOVICH: The form the wrecking activities took in
the Lepe! affair was that the pressure brought to bear on the individual peasants was particularly strong. Later the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. took measures to correct what we had done,
and the situation changed. The spirit among the individual peasants,
among those whom we had provoked, took a distinct turn for the
better. But, I repeat, the Lepel affair was only one of the episodes,
because such facts manifested themselves in a much more marked
form in other districts.
VYSHINSKY: And all this was done on your direct instructions?
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
Further, as regards rural econom)1, I should like to say something
about our diversionist activities in horse-breeding. In 1936
we caused a wide outbreak of anemia in Byelorussia. This was
done intentionally, because in Byelorussia horses are extremely
important for defence purposes. We endeavoured to undermine
this powerful base in case it should be needed in connection with
war.
As far as I can now recall, about 30,000 horses perished owing
to this measure. I should mention that this measure with regard
to horses was not carried out on our initiative only.
VYSHINSKY: On whose else?
SHARANGOVICH: We received direct instructions from the
Moscow centre of the Rights. Further, we carried out wrecking
work in the sphere of agriculture, the result of which was that the
economic showings in the border districts were worse than in the
interior districts. That is what I chiefly had to say.
VYSHINSKY: And what about industry?
SHARANGOVICH: In industry our wreckin~ activities
207

affected such objects as peat. Peat is of the highest importance in
Byelorussia as a source of power, and the undermining of this fuel
base therefore tended to undermine all branches of industry.
As to power development, here attention was mainly concentrated on the Byelorussian Regional Power Station, which feeds
the industries of Vitebsk, Orsha and Moghilev. Fuel was supplied
irregularly. Construction work was interfered with. Specifically,
I can mention the Krichevsk Cement Works, the Orsha Flax Mills,
the Moghilev Pipe Foundry...•
VYSHINSKY: And so on.
SHARANGOVICH: Yes, and a whole series of wrecking activities in the sphere of industry. Further, speaking of wrecking
activities, I must mention the cultural front, because our national-·
fascist organization attributed particular importance to this sphere,
seeing that we were a national republic. A large number of members
of our national-fascist organization were engaged in this field; in
addition there were quite a number of people, who, if not members,
could be most easily enlisted and through whom the work could be
most easily conducted. This wrecking work was performed with the
object of discrediting the national policy of the Party and the Soviet government. The wrecking work here was performed in connection with the schools and in connection with the writers' organizations and the theatre.
VYSHINSKY: In a word, along the entire line of the cultural
front, wherever damage could be done.
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: And so, summing up your criminal wrecking
activities, it may be said that there was not a single branch of Socialist construction which was ftot the object of your wrecking activities.
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: In agriculture, it was a struggle against collectivization; lawlessness towards the individual peasants
with the provocative purpose of causing discontent among the
population; muddling sowing areas for the same purpose . . . .
SHARANGOVICH: True.
VYSHINSKY: Frustrating the development of state farms by
means of irrational, inefficient and unlawful measures against the
state farms and the individual peasants?
SHARANGOVICH: True.
VYSHINSKY: Frustrating grain collections, again by unlawful
measures of all sorts?
SHARANGOVICH: True.
VYSH INS KY: A veritable system of such measures. Then the
extermination of livestock, is that so?
SHARANGOVICH: ·True.

208

VYSHlNSKY: Deliberate infection of cattle with plague and
epizootic diseases, and damage to horse-breeding?
SHARANGOVICH: True.
VYSHINSKY: Damage to horse-breeding with the object both
of ruining agriculture and of undermining the defensive power of
the country?
SHARANGOVICH: True.
VYSHINSKY: Finally, the peat industry, frustrating the development of power resources and the power industry?
SHARANGOVICH: True, true.
VYSHINSKY: On the whole cultural front, however, and wherever you could, disseminating national enmity, fanning chauvinistic
sentiments, and thus disrupting the carrying out of the national
policy of Lenin and Stalin?
SHARANGOVICH: True.
VYSHINSKY: And this was all clone by you, as head of the
organization, on the direct instructions of the Right centre, as part
of the bloc, and of the Polish intelligence service ....
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: ... whose agent you have been since 1920?
SHARANGOVICH: Since 1921.
VYSHINSKY: The records of the investigation show that it
was since 1920, but that is of no great importance. Consequently,
when you appeared in the U.S.S.R. you were already a Polish spy?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And you continued to remain a Polish spy for
many years?
· SHARANGOVICH: Until my arrest.
VYSHINSKY: That is 1922, 1923, 1924, 1925, in a word, all
the time, sixteen or seventeen years?
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so. There were intervals, but that
does not alter the situatfon.
VYSHINSKY: Intervals that did not depend upon you, chance
intervals?
SHARANGOVICH: Of course. May I continue?
Now as regards terrorism. We had instructions on terrorism.
VYSHINSKY: From whom?
SHARANGOVICH: From the Moscow centre of the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: From whom directly?
SHARANGOVICH: From Rykov.
VYSHINSKY: Ditectly? Or through somebody else?
SHARANGOVICH: I knew about it from Goloded, Antipov
and Chervyakov.
VYSHINSKY: Did you ever meet Rykov personally?
14

209

SHARANGOVICH: No. We, including inyself, adopted this
terrorist line in 1932.
VYSHINSKY: Generally, were you interested in theory, or
rather in practice?
SHARANGOVICH: I think that for such criminal work as I performed . . .
VYSHINSKY: And in your position as a spy of the Polish intelligence service?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes, generally speaking, in the organization I headed no theory was needed. What theory was needed by
such cut-throats, forgive the term, as we? fancy how much
theory you need to . . .
VYSHINSKY: Carry out the commissions of some intelligence
service. I remind you of this so that you do not branch off into the
sphere of theory, which you began with. Stick closer to practice.
SHARANGOVICH: Next, we adopted and carried on terrorism
as a practical task. We formed terrorist groups and made preparations for terrorist acts. In the first place, we were preparing
a terrorist act in 1936 against Voroshilov, when he came to Byelornssia for the manoeuvres. At that time we formed two terrorist
groups, but we did not manage to carry it off. In addition, we
made preparations for terrorist acts against other leaders of the
Party and the Soviet government. Alongside of this, here in
Moscow we formed a group which was connected with the
Byelorussian national-fascist organization, in case it might be
necessary to commit a terrorist act in Moscow.
VYSHINSKY: Was it connected with you?
SHARANGOVICH: Directly?
VYSHINSKY: As the leader of the organization?
SHARANGOVICH: No.
VYSHINSKY: Then how do you know that there was such a
group in Moscow?
SHARANGOVICH: I learnt about it from Goloded and Volkovich.
VYSHINSKY: But you were one of the leaders of this organization?
SHARANGOVICH: At that time . . .
VYSHINSKY: Did this group exist at the time when you were
one of the leaders of the national-fascist group in Byelorussia?
SHARANGOVICH: At that time I was not a member of the
centre directly.
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking whether you were a member or
not a member. What was your post when you were arrested?
SHARANGOVICH: First Secretary.
VYSHINSKY: You were one of the leaders of the fascist group
210

or

in Byelorussia, which was a part
the anti-Soviet "bloc.of Rights
and Trotskyites"?
-.
SHARANGOVICH: When preparations were being made for
this terrorist act in 1936, I was not there.
VYSHINSKY: And when were you there?
SHARANGOVICH: I came to Byelorussia in March 1937.
VYSHINSKY: And so you were in Byelorussia in 1937?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And you directed this illegal, anti-Soviet,
work of a provocateur?
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: And this group existed until quite recently?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And you learnt of this from Goloded and Volkovich?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: As an accomplice?
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, this group acfod with your knowledge?
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: And since you were the leader, it might be said
that it was under your direction?
SHARANGOVICH: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: That is what I am saying. Continue.
SHARANGOVICH: Apart from the two terrorist acts of which
I have spoken, wide activities were developed in this sphere and
a number of terrorist groups were formed.
VYSHINSKY: Let us summarize briefly what you plead guilty
to in this case.
SHARANGOVICH: Firstly, that I am a traitor to the country.
VYSHINSKY: An old Polish spy.
SHARANGOVICH: Secondly, I am a conspirator.
VYSHINSKY: A conspirator.
SHARANGOVICH: Thirdly, that I directly carried on wrecking activities.
VYSHINSKY: No, thirdly, that you directly are one of the
principal leaders of a national-fascist group in Byelorussia and
one of the active members of the anti-Soviet "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites."
SHARANGOVICH: True. Next, that I personally carried on
wrecking activities.
VYSHINSKY: Diversive acts.
SHARANGOVICH: True.
14*

211

'rHE PRESIDENT: An organizer of terrorist acts against the
leaders of the Party and the government.
SHARANGOVICH: True.
THE PRESIDENT: And you did all this with the purp-0se ...
SHARANGOVICH: And I did all this with the purpose of overthrowing the Soviet power, with the purpose of bringing about
the victory of fascism and the defeat of the Soviet Union in the
event of war with fascist states.
THE PRESIDENT: Ready to dismember the U.S.S.R., to
separate Byelorussia and transform it into ...
SHARANGOV!CH: In.to a capitalist state under the yoke of
the Polish landlords and capitalists.
THE PRESIDENT: Of this you fully admit yourself to be
guilty?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes, I clo.
THE PRESIDENT: I have no more questions. Be seated.
We shall now proceed to examine the accused Khodjayev. Do
you confirm the testimony you gave regarding your anti-Soviet
activities in the course of many years?
KHOO JA YEV: I do. I carried on anti-Soviet activities h1
Uzbekistan.
THE PRES ID ENT: Comrade Vyshinsky, have you an.y questions?
VYSHINSKY: Accused Khodjayev, tell us, to what do you
plead guilty?
KHODJAYEV: I have already in the preliminary investigation given sincere and honest testimony regarding the crimes I
have committed, and, without concealing anything, I intend to
tell the Court, even if briefly, the principal stages in these crimes
I have committed. My crimes against the revolution, against the
workers' and peasants' state and against the Party began in 1-920.
In 1920 I was placed at the head of the Soviet state-I am referring to the Bokhara People ,s Republic-at the head of its supreme
executive authority. And it was at this period of my activity that
I joined the bourgeois-nationalist organization "MiHi-lttikhad."
VYSHINSKY: What does it mean?
KHODJAYEV: It means "National Alliance." It set itself
the aim of transforming the Bokhara People's Republic into a
bourgeois-democratic republic, as a buffer state between Britain
and Soviet Russia. I joined this bourgeois-nationalist organi~
.zation, and as an active leader of this bourgeois-nationalist
organization I took part in and directed its counter-revolutionary,
anti-Soviet activities. This was the first stage.
VYSHINSKY: How long did this first stage last?
212

KHODJAYEV: If you will permit me, I shall come to this
later.
VYSHINSKY: As you please.
KHODJAYEV: I want to speak about my crimes.
VYSHINSKY: To the point.
•
KHODJAYEV: To the point.
VYSHINSKY: But if it is no trouble to you, mention the years
too. From 1920 to ...
KHODJA YEV: Formally, as I see it, until 1921, but actually
it continued later. In 1925 I was appointed Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars of Uzbekistan. In 1928 I formed connections with nationalist circles of the former Turkestan Republic;
and subsequently, in Uzbekistan, in one of the leaders of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan, Ikramov, I found an ally and together
we formed the nucleus which carried on nationalist anti-Soviet
activities in Uzbekistan. So this is the second stage of my active
anti-Soviet nationalist work.
Finally, there is the third stage-1930, when during one
of my visits to Moscow, after a meeting on business with Rykov in
the Council of People's Commissars of the U.S.S. R., while conversing with him on various subjects, we came to a.n understanding about joint anti-Soviet work.
VYSHINSKY: What work?
KHODJAYEV: Anti-Soviet.
VYSHINSKY: That is?
KHODJAYEV: That is, joint work of the Uzbek nationalist
organization under the direction of the Rights against the leadership of the Party and against the Soviet state. Rykov at that
time said that in that event-in the event of our joint work-the
centre of the Rights would guarantee the independence of the
Uzbek Republic ....
VYSHINSKY: What does that mean-the independence of
the Uzbek Republic?
KHODJAYEV: In this case independence of the Soviet Union
must be taken to mean dependence on some other country, a capitalist country.
VYSHINSKY: Is that how you understood Rykov?
KHODJAYEV: Yes. that is how I understood him.
VYSHINSKY: What reasons did he give for it?
KHODJAYEV: There was only one reason-that both the
Rights and we, the nationalists, were fighting- the Party leadership, the Soviet government. In order that the Rights might gain
their ends and that we might gflin our ends, we would have t-0_
smash this leadership. For this purpose we concluded an alliance.
That is, the aim was the same, namely, to overthrow the Soviet
213

governmeI).t _and the _leadership_ of the Central Committee of the
C.P.S.U.
VYSHINSKY: To weaken the U.S.S.R.?
KHODJAYEV: To weaken the U.S.S.R., undoubtedly.
VYSHINSKY: And why was the U.S.S.R. to be weakened?
KHODJAYEV: In order to get to this, permit me to give my
account more systematically.
VYSHINSKY: Very well, only I ask you to try to answer this
question.
KHOD JAYEV: I want to dwell· briefly on the Bokhara period,
so that it may be clear how I arrived at the position I am in today.
After the revolution of 1920, I did not join the conspiratorial
organization of the Bokhara nationalists fortuitously, for I had
been brought up as a nationalist. And that limited, brief participation in the revolutionary movement, in the revolution, my emigration to Soviet Russia, thanks to which I thought 1 had overcome my
nationalism, proved to be inadequate, and although it seemed to me
that I had overcome my nationalism, actually this was not the
case. And so, when I was already a member of the Party, I joined
the bourgeois-nationalist organization. The majority of the bourgeois-nationalist organization of Bokhara at that time orientated
itself on England. Of course, these nationalist circles even
then realized perfectlywell that independence of Soviet Russia and
reliance on England would not be a simple matter, and that England
would not help us for the sake of our beautiful eyes. Even at that
time they considered it possible to accept the protectorate of England, and under this protectorate completely sever ourselves from
Soviet Russia. And in pursuit of this aim we at that time adopted a
number of measures. We systematically ousted from the Soviet and
Party apparatuses sincere members of the Party, genuine Soviet
people, and appointed our own people in their place. We· mustered
cadres so as to take real possession of the leading ·posts in the
Soviet apparatus, and really to govern the state. For this purpose
we recruited our cadres chiefly from among the bourgeois youth,
and did not train them in Soviet schools but principally sent them
abroad, to Germany and Turkey. At the same time we did a great
deal to organize armed forces, since we did not possess much influence in the army. We formed our armed forces chiefly in the
shape of the militia. We endeavoured to make use of the Basmachi
movement, which at that time had already appeared in Bokhara.
We endeavoured to create new .Basmachi cadres.
That is the essence of the work we carried on in Bokhara.
I have already referred to the foreign policy orientation, which
was in every way to weaken the influence of Soviet Russia in
Bokhara and to strengthen the connections and relations with neighbpuring capitalist states, and through them to form real con214.

nections with England, which at that time was the most outspoken
opponent of Soviet Russia. I am referring to 1920-21.
Incidentally, my anti-Soviet sentiments also found expression
in the fact tha.t when the question was raised in 1923 of the economic union of Turkestan, Bokhara and Khorezm for the purpose
of co-ordination of action, I emphatically opposed this economic
union, considering it but the prelude to an even greater strengthening of the influence of Soviet Russia and the Sovietization
of Bokhara.
Further, when in 1924-25 the question was raised of the national-territorial delimitation of the Soviet republics of Central
Asia, I was opposed to this delimitation, but my name has gone
down in history as that of a supporter of national delimitation
because I spoke and agitated in favour of it. It happened as follows.
Actually, there 1s no Bokharan nation as such. There was the
state of Bokhara, inhabited by Uzbeks, Turkmens, Tadjiks and
a number of other nationalities. With the growth of the national
consciousness of these nations, the question of their formation into
states arose; they wanted to live independently. The LeninistStalinist policy placed no obstacles in the way of this. Hence
the question of national delimitation arose. But to come out
openly against delimitation in those days meant declariqg oneself
an open enemy, which I couldn't do. Concealing my real attitude,
I intended to continue the struggle.
That is why, pretending to be a supporter of national delimitation, I found myself at the head of the Uzbek Soviet state.
VYSHINSKY: That is, you manoeuvred?
KHODJAYEV: I manoeuvred, played a double game.
Of course, in 1925-26-27 I could not yet carry on anti-Soviet
work in Uzbekistan, although I had remained a nationalist, a
bourgeois nationalist. I could not do so only because I had no
cadres. I had lost part of them in Bokhara at the time of the
struggle, another part had left generally, and in Uzbekistan I still
did not have new people. And so these two or three years were for
me a period of preparation.
#
VYSHINSKY: For what?
KHOO JAYEV: Preparation for the marshalling of bourgeois
national forces for the struggle, for the continuation of the struggle
I had waged in 1920 when I was in Bokhara.
VYSHINSKY; Against whom?
KHODJAYEV: Against the Soviet power.
The "Group of the Eighteen" is known in the Uzbek Party organization. This group arose in 1918. I was the organizer of this group.
When the land reform was being carried out in order to give land
to the poorer sections of the population of Uzbekistan, there was
215

a considerable intensification of activity of the upper kulak-bai
stratum. Furthermore, a number of the responsible workers in
Uzbekistan were dissatisfied with this reform. I took advantage
of this dissatisfaction and began to form a group of .Uzbek nationalists.
If the "Group of the Eighteen" be taken as a definite stage
in the transition to my active nationalist work, it can be explained
as follows.
VYSHINSKY: In what year was this?
KHODJAYEV: It was roughly in the middle of 1925. This
"Group of the Eighteen" decided to bring certain pressure to
bear on the Party. It did so on the assumption that there were
not very many workers of big calibre in Uzbekistan. If these
eighteen people, the most prominent, were to resign as a protest,
it would be sufficient to compel the Party to make certain concessions to the bais and the kulaks. We wanted in this way to
seize hold of the Party leadership in Uzbekistan. In this manoeuvre we counted on one of the leaders of the Communist Party in
Uzbekistan at that time, lkramov; we counted on him, for we
knew that in the period 1918-20, that is, when he was still a
young man, he had taken part in the bourgeois-nationalist organizations in Turkestan. This was known to me and to a number of
other members of the "Group of the Eighteen."
·
VYSH INS KY: In what organizations?
KHODJA YEV: It was the Pan-Tyurkic organization headed
by Ryskulov.
VYSHINSKY: When?
KHODJAYEV: This was in 1918-19.
VYSHINSKY: What was it called?
KHODJAYEV: "lttikhad-Vykherty." It means "Unity and
Progress." It was of the same type as the Young Turk Party"Unity and Progress."
VYSHINSKY: Go on.
KHOO JA YEV: I knew tf1at Ikramov had belonged to this
group, but for some reason Ikramov did not join us and we did not
carry on any direct negotiations with him. At the congress we
were beaten. After this we again decided to conceal·our real position,
handed in a statement that we had been mistaken, that we had
acted wrongly and that we were prepared to carry out the line
of the Party.
VYSHINSKY: You manoeuvred a second time?
KHODJAYEV2 Double-dealing for a second time. From
1925 to 1928 I was establishing closer relationswith Ikramov on
the basis of practical work. lkramov was in the Central Committee
and I was in the Counci 1 of People's Commissars. 1 knew that I
wa~ the leader of a nationalist group.
VYSHINSKY: You knew?
216

KHODJAYEV: I knew that I myself was a leader of a nationalist group; but that Ikramov had belonged to the same bourgeoisnationalist group, and that Ikramov had his own nationalist
group, that I did not yet know. Having established closer relations with him, I got to know that lkramov had his own nationalist group called "Milli-Istiklal," which means "National
Independence." I wi II not say that we united, but we began to
co-ordinate our work. Specifically, our anti-Soviet work at that
period . . .
VYSHINSKY: When was that?
KHODJAYEV: It was in the middle of 1928 or at the beginning of 1928. It is very hard to say exactly. It was a long time ago.
VYSHINSKY: You and Ikramov co-ordinated your work?
KHODJAYEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY (to the President): Permit me to question Ikramov. Accused lkramov, have you heard Khodjayev's testimony?
IKRAMOV: Yes, I have.
VYSHINSKY: Do you agree with his testimony?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSH INS KY: Accused lkramov, were you a member of a
secret nationalist organization in 1928?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Was this organization called "Milli-Istiklal "?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSH INS KY: So this part of Khodjayev's testimony is true?
IKRAMOV: It is.
VYSHINSKY: Was Khodjayev a member of the secret nationalist fascist organization "Mi IH-Istiklal"?
IKRAMOV: No, Faizulla Khodjayev was not a member. Khodjayev had his own organization.
KHODJAYEV: That is what I said.
VYSH INSKY: So Khodjayev belonged to one organization
and you to another. Both organizations were bourgeois-nationalist, of the fascist type.
IKRAMOV: That is so. But it is not true to say that we ourJ
selves established the contact. The contact was established owing
to pressure from the Right centre.
VYSHINSKY: That is?
IKRAMOV: Under the pressure of Bukharin and the direct
guidance of Antipov, the two nationalist organizations co-ordinaied their work.
VYSHINSKY: Wherein, then, do you differwith Khodjayev?
IKRAMOV: I say that it was not in 1928, but in 1933, owing
to the pressure of Bukharin.
217

VYSHINSKY: And there was no co-ordination in 1928?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: You acted separately? Accused Khodjayev,
how is that?
KHODJAYEV: I did not discuss this question with Ikramov
before giving my explanations to the Court, and I do not understand what are the motives of the accused lkramov when
he, while admitting that he belonged to a bourgeois-nationalist
organization, puts a later date to the time of our joint work. It
seems to me that lkramov wants to evade certain facts. Perhaps
I am mistaken, it is only my assumption, but permit me to mention a couple of facts.
VYSHINSKY: Please.
KHODJAYEV: Before we decided to form an alliance with
the Rights, lkramov and I chiefly (I do not mention other people
just now because they do not appear in this trial) were leaders
of what was essentially wide anti-Soviet work. What did it consist in? First, in the fact that we set ourselves the aim, with the
help of our nationalist cadres, of seizing a number of Soviet organizations in Uzbe~istan, such as the People's Commissariat
of Education, so as to have the schools in our own hands, the
universities, the press, the planning organizations, the People's
Commissariat of Agriculture, etc. And I must say that we achieved
this aim.
VYSHINSKY: Who are "we"?
KHODJAYEV: Ikramov and I. We represented the two nationalist organizations of which I have spoken.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ikramov, in this part do you agree
with the testimony of the accused Khodjayev?
IKRAMOV: I do.
VYSHINSKY: The seizure of leading posts in a number of
organizations?
IKRAMOV: Yes, I shall give more extensive testimony.
VYSHINSKY: You were then following your own line?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you co-ordinate your activities with Khodjayev?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps your assistants talked to each other?
IKRAMOV: It is possible.
VYSHINSKY: At any rate the fact mentioned by the accused
Khodjayev, testifying to your definite criminal political line, is true?
IKRAMOV: It is.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Khodjayev, how do you know -that
Ikramov's organization was also functioning?
IKRAMOV: Let him say.
218

KHODJAYEV: At the preliminary investigation I mentioned
concrete facts. In 1928 a certain_ Burnashev, a close assistant of
Ikramov, came to see me on behalf of the latter.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ikramov, did you have an assistant
in your conspiratorial organization named Burnashev?
IKRAMOV: Burnashev was not a member of the nationalist
organization.
VYSHINSKY: Who was he?
IKRAMOV: He was in the inner Party group. He went to
talk with Faizulla.
VYSHINSKY: Pardon me, it is not quite clear. Do you know
Burnashev?
IKRAMOV: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Was he your assistant in secret work?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Did he know about the secret work?
IKRAMOV: He did not know about it as a nationalist organization.
VYSHINSKY: How did he know about it?
IKRAMOV: He belonged to Ikramov's inner Party group.
VYSH INS KY: What sort of group was that?
IKRAMOV: A legal one.
VYSHINSKY: In what year was that?
IKRAMOV: In 1928.
VYSHINSKY: What sort of group was it?
IKRAMOV: This group existed legally in 1927-28. Faizulla
and his group were chastised at every Plenum of the Central Committee. He, it is said, lost his own men, the Bokhara group, but
we brought about his loss, that is, we smashed him.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
IKRAMOV: Because there was dualism. We fought, one on
the Party position, the other . . .
VYSHINSKY: On the nationalist position?
IKRAMOV: Yes, on the nationalist position.
VYSHINSKY: And so you were the Ieader of this organization?
IKRAMOV: I was not the leader of the organization, but a
member.
VYSHINSKY: An. active member?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: A passive one?
IKRAMOV: Yes. At that time of dualism, and for reasons of
secrecy, I spoke twice.
VYSHINSKY: But did Burnashev know that there was dual~
ism among you?
IKRAMOV: He probably knew or suspected.
219

VYSHINSKY: It is possible, of course, that Burnashev assumed
something and based his negotiations with Khodjayev on this
assumption. It is important to know whether what Khodjayev said
corresponds to the truth.
.
IKRAMOV: Burnashev went to negotiate with Faizulla without my consent.
VYSHINSKY: Was it so?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What did they talk about?
IKRAMOV: He came and said . . .
VYSHINSKY: What did they talk about?
IKRAMOV: I do not know what they talked about, but I can
tell you what he told me.
VYSHINSKY: What did he tell you?
IKRAMOV: That Faizulla was completely laying down his
arms and wanted to subordinate himself to me, Ikramov, in all
respects.
VYSHINSKY: Why was that?
IKRAMOV: So as to put an end to the struggle. I said to Burnashev that r had not authorized him and he had no business to
interfere.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
IKRAMOV: Because Faizulla Khodjayev's cadres had not yet
been completely smashed.
VYSHINSKY: That is your internal politics, we shall go into
that later. The fact is that Burnashev was your man?
IKRAMOV: He was my man.
VYSHINSKY: You had your own people,. and Khodjayev had
his, and you were both members of a nationalist organization?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINS}\Y: And that man went to negotiate. with another
master, Khodjayev?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And you were displeased?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ikramov, is it true what Khodjayev
says, that Burnashev came to speak to him in your name?
IKRAMOV: It is.
VYSHINSKY: That is what I wanted to know. Sit down.
KHODJAYEV: If the Ccurt will permit me, I would like to
mention two facts in connection with this statement.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
KHOD JAYEV: I again cannot understand· Ikramov's position.
It i·s·his affair, of course. He says that Burnashev. neg.)tiated with
me, but he did not know, he refers to the fight with me. There'
really was a fight.
220

VYSHiNSKY: What about?
KHOO JA YEV: I was at the head of the "Group of the EightEen." The Party beat me for it. Ikramov played a double game.
He was at the head of the Party, he beat me and I could do mthing about it.
VYSHINSKY: And Ikramov himself at this time was . . .
KHODJAYEV: He himself was a n£itionalist. That is the kind
of fight it was. I do not deny it. I mentioned it in my testimony.
VYSHINSKY: I have one question to ask Ikramov. Is it true
that at that time you were playing a double game?
IKRAMOV: In 1921-22?
VYSHINSKY: No, in 1928?
IKRAMOV: I played a double game in 1928.
VYSHINSKY: Continue.
KHODJAYEV: At the end of 1929 or at the beginning of 1930
two very close friends of Ikramov and members of the organization-Ramzi and Batu-were arrested.
VYSHINSKY: In what year?
KHODJA YEV: At the beginning of 1930 or at the end of 1929.
They were arrested for counter-revolutionary anti-Soviet activities.
VYSHINSKY: Who were they?
KHODJAYEV: One worked in the People's Commissariat of
Education, the other, I do not remember in what capacity-lthink
as Second Secretary.
VYSHINSKY: Let us ask Ikramov. Who were Ramzi and Batu
at that time?
IKRAMOV: Ran1Zi was the chief of the Scientific Research
Institute, while Batu was chief of Cultural Affairs in the People's
Commissariat of Education.
VYSHINSKY: Why were they arrested?
IKRAMOV: For belonging to a nationalist counter-revolutionary organization.
VYSHINSKY: Under your leadership?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Who was the leader then?
IKRAMOV: Formally, the leader was Karimov, I had only
spoken twice to these people.
VYSHINSKY: One can have one talk, but a very thorough one.
Were they your people?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
KHODJAYEV: And so, when these people were arrested-it
is hard for me to speak now be.cause I have no witnesses.
VYSHINSKY: lkramov is a witness.
KHODJAYEV: Ikramov will deny it. I ask you to believe me;
of course, I cannot be believed either, because I figure in such a

221

positioit. The first person to whom lkratnov turned irt connection
with these arrests was myself.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
KHODJAYEV: Because he funked, he thought that he would
be incriminated. He knew that I knew about this business, he called
me up on the telephone and asked me to come to his house; there
we discussed what to do and decided not to interfere in the Ramzi
and Batu case, so that neither I nor Ikramov would be involved.
I, like Ikramov, in solidarity with him, fought against the
leadership of the Central Committee in Uzbekistan, which in
connection with the Ramzi and Batu case wanted to expose the
nationalists. Together with Ikramov I waged a struggle around
the trial of these people who had fought against the Party leadership and against the Central Asia Bureau of that time.
VYSHINSKY: Was that the Kasymov trial?
KHODJAYEV: The Kasymov trial might have led to the exposure of the nationalists, and Ikramov and I took measures to
prevent this. True, I had had no connections with Kasymov, but
in so far as Ikramov wanted to hush up the case, and as he was my
ally, I did everything to support his line. I do not know why he
strikes out all this and claims that he established contact with me
in 1933. I do not object, but I say this so that the Court at least
may know direct from me what I know. Whom the Court wi 11 believe is another matter, but I am saying all I know.
VYSHINSKY: I have a question to put to Ikramov. Did you
telephone Khodjayev about the arrest of Ramzi and Batu?
IKRAMOV: I would like to know what town this was in.
KHODJAYEV: Samarkand.
IKRAMOV: If it is Samarkand, then I was not there at that
time, I was in Kislovodsk.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, did you telephone Khodjayev? Where
was Ramzi arrested?
IKRAMOV: In Samarkand.
VYSHINSKY: Where were you?
IKRAMOV: In Samarkand.
VYSHINSKY: Did you telephone Khodjayev?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Did Khodjayev come to see you?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: So he is not telling the truth?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: But did you try to secure Ramzi 's release?
IKRAMOV: I gave testimony ....
VYSHINSKY: Did you try to secure Ramzi 's release?
IKRAMOV: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated. Acc~sed Khodjayev, continue.

222

K1-IODjAYEV: I now come to the more important part of my
testimony, which deals with the period of 1928, that is to say, the
period when the First Five-Year Plan was drawn up.
VYSHINSKY: So after all we can take it as established that
you were the head of one bourgeois-nationalist organization in 1928,
Ikramov was the head of another nationalist organization, as you
say-and as he says, he was a member of this organization.
KHODJAYEV: I cannot put questions to you, otherwise I would
ask you one question. . . .
VYSHINSKY: No, you had better question Ikramov.
KHODJAYEV (to Ikramov): You regard Karimov as the leader
of this organization? But Karimov is a pup compared with you,
he is your pupil, how could he lead you?
IKRAMOV: I mean directing the intensification of the work
I had been carrying on since 1931. . . .
VYSHINSKY: There is day-to-day leadership and not day-today leadership.
IKRAMOV: In the course of three years we had two conversations. If we are to speak of ideological leadership . . .
VYSHINSKY: Was Karimov a member of your organization?
IKRAMOV: He was.
VYSHINSKY: Did he lead you at that time as a member of
the organization, or did you lead him?
IKRAMOV: I did not lead him, nor did he lead me.
VYSHINSKY: But who was the leader?
IKRAMOV: I understand it this way . . .
VYSHINSKY: Who was the leader of your "Milli-Istiklal"?
IKRAMOV: Karimov.
VYSHINSKY: So Karimov was the leader?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VISHINSKY: You were a member of that organization?
IKRAMOV; Yes.
VYSHINSKY: That means he led you?
IKRAMOV: No, he gave me no instructions.
KHODJAYEV: I do not know whether the Court is aware that
the bourgeois nationalists, particularly in Central Asia, had a
theory of organizing a self-contained economy, that is to say, of
making the economy of the republic develop independently of the
other parts of the Soviet Union, of making it possible for the republic to live without need for the rest of the Soviet Union in
the event of possibilities arising for active, direct struggle. Well,
we applied this theory, that is to say, we drew up the First FiveYear Plan in a way that ran counter to the instructions of the Union
government and conformed to the line of the nationalists for a
self-contained economy. We planned the economy in such a way
as to have less cotton, because it was an industrial crop which most
223

of all bound Uzbekistan with the Union; second!y, We planned to
develop agriculture in Uzbekistan so as to have more grain farming
not only on the non-irrigated lands, but also on the irrigated
lands, in order to be independent of Russian grain, and, lastly, we
planned the development of industry, road bui1ding, etc., in such
a way as to be more economically independent than ever of Soviet
Russia, of the Soviet Union, at the end of the First Five-Year Plan.
In Moscow they saw through this plan. The government rejected this Five-Year Plan. On Stalin's initiative the cotton program was revised. And so, I cannot say exactly just now, but I remember one thing, and that is that out of 36,000,000 poods of cotton to be grown for the whole Soviet Union, according to the new
decision of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. (Bolsheviks) and
the government, Uzbekistan was to provide about 21,000,000 poods.
IKRAMOV: 28,000,000 poods.
KHODJAYEV: 28,000,000 poods-that was later.
And so we realized that if the government's instructions were
carried out, not a damn thing would be left of the Five-Year Plan
that we had drawn up. And so in order to disrupt these new instructions of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. (Bolsheviks) and
the government, in order not to provide the cotton, we drew up
another plan, an inflated one, considerably exaggerated. It was
like this. The government called for 36,000,000 poods of cotton
fibre for the whole Union, but according to our plan, if all the other
republics kept pace with Uzbekistan as we had planned it, the
total would be approximately 45,000,000-48,000,000 poods for
the Union. But in order to fulfil a plan of 45,000,000-48,000,000
poods of cotton, what was required? We began to apply the monoculture theory, that is to say, the theory of llaving one predominant crop in agriculture-cotton. To achieve this we would have
to smash up the crop rotation, plough up the grass lands-that
is, clover, fodder crops-eliminate from the irrigated lands not only
wheat and barley, but a crop like rice, which cannot grow otherwise.
This would have meant causing enormous discontent among the
people, because we put it to them in this way: "This is the Moscow
plan, we are merely the servants of Moscow, we are carrying out
Moscow's instructions. Don't you like it? The1~ complain against
Moscow." This is the task we set ourselves.
VYSHINSKY: A provocative task?
KHODJAYEV: A provocative task, set deliberately, and pursued for a number of years.
What did it lead to? It actually led to the destruction of the
rotation of crops system, it led to a diminution in the number of
cattle, it led to a diminution in silk cultivation, because even here
we pursued our wrecking activities, and in the long run it Jed
224

to a diminution even of the cotton yield. And that is why for years
Uzbekistan failed to fulfil its cotton plans.
We planned in such a way that in Ferghana, for example, the
principal cotton base of the Soviet Union, and in Bokhara, the
second base at that time, the cotton crop reached 96-98 per cent
of all crops. If a peasant had 10 hectares of land he had to sow 8
or 9 hectares with cotton. You will understand yourselves that if
only one hectare is left for all the rest, the farm goes to ruin.
And in the Samarkand and Tashkent regions, where there are huge
tracts of land, where for ages extensive cultivation has been the
practice, the cotton crop amounted to 30-35 and 40-45 per cent.
But it could have been done this way: 50 per cent of the area could
have been sown with cotton in Uzbekistan and 80 per cent in Ferghana and Bokhara. Had this been done it would have been possible
to fulfil the plan quite easily. This is exactly what was done under
pressure in 1935. But in the period I am speaking of it was not done.
I want to say here that this was not a fortuitous thing, that it was
not mere blockheadedness, or the result of inability. It was done
quite deliberately by our organization, under my leadership and
under Ikramov's leadership. We two-he as the chief in the Party,
and I in the Soviet government-directed this business.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to put a question to the accused
lkramov.
Accused Ikramov, what have you to say about this explanation?
IKRAMOV: I fully corroborate it. But I want to add something. In this business our allies (there was no agreement, but there
was tacit consent), our allies were the Trotskyites.
VYSHINSKY: But you acted under the leadership of the bloc?
IKRAMOV: Each acted in his own line. There was no verbal
agreement, but the Trotskyites, headed by the Cotton Committee,
which was directed by Reingold, ahd under Zelensky's direction,
encouraged this policy.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Zelensky, do you corroborate the statement that this policy was carried out under your direction?
ZELENSKY: I left Turkestan in January 1931.
KHODJAYEV: And this was in 1928.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Zelensky, did you issue the forrnulaCentral Asia must overtake and surpass the foremost districts of
the Soviet Union?
ZELENSKY: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: And what did this formula signify?
ZELENSKY: The disruption of collectivization.
VYSHINSKY: Not only that, but also the disruption of the
cotton plans, and the ruin of the dekhkan farms. Do you corroborate
this?
ZELENSKY: Yes, I do.

225
15

VYSHINSKY: What was your position there at that time?
ZELENSKY: Secretary of the Central Committee.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for 20 minutes.

*

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Khodjayev, continue your evidence.
KHODJAYEV: I now come to the third stage. I said at the
opening that in 1930 I established contact with the Rights in the
person of Rykov.
I would like to relate the circumstances and conditions under
which we met and the terms on which Rykov and I reached an
agreement. This was in 1930, when I went to see him on official
business. Rykov questioned me about the situation in Uzbekistan in regard to collectivization. I told him the facts that were
known to me about what was going on in the rural districts, I told
him of a certain discontent that existed in Uzbekistan at the time,
and about a number of shortcomings. When Alexei lvanovich asked
me, ''What about the tempo of collectivization, what about the livestock?"-1 said that there was a diminution in livestock. The tempo
was high and this was causing a certain amount of discontent, but
we were rectifying this on the basis of the decisions adopted on
this question. In short, we were acting in accordance with the
Party's instructions. This was approximately the reply I gave.
Evidently Rykov realized that I was not speaking straight, not
speaking frankly. He then plainly told me that he knew that I belonged to the bourgeois-nationalist group in Uzbekistan, and also
Ikramov, about whom he was also informed, and that therefore
there was no need for any diplomacy between us, I ought to speak
out quite plainly.
Rykov described the position in the Soviet country at that period as critical owing to collectivization, owing to the discontent,
as he put it, of the peasantry with this mad, as he put it, line, which
the Stalin leadership was pursuing. He said that if things continued
in this way they would lead to inevitable disaster. We Rights,
he said, are fighting to change this line, but the line could be changed
only if we came into power. Consequently our task is to overthrow
the Soviet power. We are fighting again,st. the Party leadership
with a view to seizing power, with a view to capturing the government. You nationalists, of course, are also dissatisfied with this
policy, but by acting isolatedly you will not achieve your goal;
if we united with you nationalists, and there are other forces, then

226

we would have a very large force, a united force, then, of course,
we could succeed in changing the leadership.
Of course, I cannot say that I am repeating what he said word for
word, but I am conveying the essence of what Rykov said, the
substance of what he said.
The question being put so bluntly, I could do nothing else but
reveal everything to him, and I said that what he said was true,
the more so that my previous activities, particularly between 1928
and 1930, had to a very large extent already prepared me for accepting a proposal coming not only from what for me was then such
an authoritative person as Alexei Ivanovich Rykov. I would have
accepted the proposal even from a person of lower rank because
I was already prepared for it.
And so we arrived at an agreement about our method of operations. For the beginning Rykov gave me the following line:
firstly, wrecking, mainly in the sphere of agriculture; what I have
already related in connection with the drafting of the First FiveYear Plan and the cotton plan was very largely the reflection of
these instructions, which I received from A. I. Rykov, and which
I communicated to Ikramov.
Secondly, we were to unite all the opposition groups and forces
that could possibly be found and direct these forces against the
leadership of the C.P.S.U. (Bolsheviks), against the governmentstimulate wrecking, provocative methods of work, anti-Soviet activities.
In conformity with these instructions of Rykov's (at that time
I had no other connections, and it is har~ly likely that anybody
had had these connections before me), we began to carry out this
wrecking work. Later on I will deal in greater detail with the
different branches of economy and with the other instructions.
In the autumn of 1933 Bukharin arrived in Uzbekistan, ostensibly on his way to Kirghizia or the Pamirs-I do not know, I do
not remember which. At that time I only met him once, in the
country house of the Central Committee in Tashkent, but I had
no direct conversation with him. I heard from Ikramov about conversations between him and Bukharin, and about the instructions
which Bukharin left for our nationalist organization. I think lkramov himself will relate this in greater detail, and therefore I will
not dwell on this episode.
In I 934 Antipov arrived in Uzbekistan. Until then I had not
known that Antipov also belonged to the Rights. On his arrival
Antipov plainly told me that he had heard from Rykov and Bukharin that I was the leader of one of the nationalist groups in Uzbekistan, that in the persons of myself and lkramov a bloc bad
been established between the Rights and our nationalist groups,
15*

227

attd that he wanted to talk to me in this connection in the name of

the centre of the Rights.
The first thing that Antipov said about this was mainly reproaches
that our organization was not sufficiently active, that we were unable
to work properly, that we were employing obsolete methods, that
we did not understand the situation, that we did not understand
that the struggle was becoming more acute, and because of our
failure to understand it we were heading towards failure.
Antipov gave me direct instructions to stimulate wrecking and
diversionist activity. More than that, he said, we must increase
provocative work so as to cause considerable discontent among
the masses, and we must proceed more actively to form insurrectionary groups; in Uzbekistan we must form a couple of terrorist
groups-they might be needed, he said. And lastly, we must establish direct connections with England, the country that was most
of all interested in deciding the fate of Central Asia.
These were the instructions that Antipov gave me in the course
of several conversations. He lived there a month or more. Antipov
told me that he had had similar conversations with lkramov and
that Ikramov had raised no objection to these proposals. It goes
without saying that I, too, raised no objections. After that I had
a number of other talks with Antipov at his country house, at the
Council of People's Commissars, and in his office, but no further
instructions were given me. Largely I informed him of what was
being done.
In 1936 Bukharin arrived in Tashkent. I met him twice: once
at the country house of the Central Committee, where he lived with
Tsekher, and on the other occasion he visited me at my country house
near Tashkent. This was in August 1936. Bukharin asked me
how we were carrying out the instructions of the centre of the Rights.
I told him of the extensive plans for wrecking, that we had planned
a couple of diversionist acts in the sphere of irrigation development, and that in general the work was going on fairly well, but in
agriculture we were encountering difficulties owing to the Party's
policy-the rectification of distortions, the transfer of household
land to the collective farmers and the bonuses for overfulfilling
the plan were all hindering our work, disrupting our plans, and
creating difficulties; but nevertheless we were doing our best and
were fulfilling our instructions as far as possible. I also informed
him about the other branches of economy. I will not deal with this
in detail. But Bukharin was dissatisfied with the information
I gave him. He was dissatisfied not because we were carrying out
our wrecking and anti-Soviet provocative activities badly, but
because, firstly, we had no insurrectionary cadres, secondly, we
had no definitely formed terrorist groups, and, thirdly, we had not
228

established connections with England. These three things were
the cause of Bukharin's dissatisfaction.
VYSHINSKY: How was this expressed?
KHODJAYEV: He said that we were working badly, that this
was not the way to work. Of course, he did not abuse me. and could
not do so, but just said plainly that this was bad, that this was inadequate, that allies ought not to work like this.
VYSHINSKY: He urged you to display more activity?
KHOD JAYEV: Yes, to work better and more actively.
VYSHINSKY: Meaning by that?
KHODJAYEV: Organizing insurrectionary cadres.
.
VYSHINSKY: That is one.
KHOD JAYEV: Organizing terrorist groups.
VYSHINSKY: That is two.
KHOD JAYEV: And establishing connections with England.
VYSHINSKY: What did Bukharin want of you when he spoke
about connections with England?
KHODJAYEV: I wanted to talk about this later on, but I can
do so now. Bukharin said that an agreement had been reached with
fascist Germany, and that one was impending with japan. But in
regard to the Central Asiatic Republics, the nearest powerful country
was England. We ought to reach an agreement with her. We Rights,
he said, would take part in this, but you are nearer the frontier,
so you must establish the connections yourselves.
VYSHINSKY: Near to which frontier?
KHOD JAYEV: Afghanistan. There is an English representative there. Bukharin said that when it is a matter of the capitalist countries assisting us Rights to seize power, and you to
obtain your independence, we have to promise something, to
give something.
·
VYSHINSKY: Give what? Promise what?
KHODJAYEV: To give means accepting a British protectorate, that is, as a minimum. I need not mention economic things,
which are natural. Uzbekistan with its 5,000,000 population could
not become an independent state between two colossuses-the
Soviet Union on the one side and Great Britain on the other. We
must make fast on some shore; if you sail away from one shore,
you must make for another shore.
VYSHINSKY: Is that what Bukharin said?
KHOD JA YEV: That is how I understood him.
VYSHINSKY: And did Bukharin point to England as the new
shore?
KHODJAYEV: That is how I understood him.
VYSHINSKY: And so, secession from the Soviet Union, the
independence of Uzbekistan, an agreement with England mean
that U;zbekist;rn re?.ches another shore?

229

KHOO JA YEV: That is what I understood.
VYSHINSKY: When was this?
KHOOJAYEV: This was in August 1936.
VYSHINSKY: This coincided with your inclinations and
wishes?
KHOO JAYEV: I would not like to talk about this in Court
now because this is the most painful from the personal point of
view. Objectively it coincided. But I had different personal
inclinations, and I will not talk about them. I have committed
crimes, I want to answer for them as they were committed.
VYSHINSKY: You have a right to say what you like and not
to say what you think you need not say.
KHOOJAYEV: I had quite a long conversation with Bukharin on these questions. I do not know whether it is necessary
to. repeat the whole of this conversation or whether what I have
already said is sufficient.
VYSHINSKY: Say everything that has a direct bearing on
this case.
KHOD JAYEV: As I have said, there were grounds for this.
VYSHINSKY: The same as for the other questions of the same
kind about which others have spoken? For example Sharangovich?
KHOD JA YEV: Somewhat of a larger order. Bukharin had
just returned from a visit to Europe.
VYSHINSKY: From abroad?
KHOOJAYEV: From abroad. He spoke about the stabilization of capitalism and said that fascism, particularly German
fascism, had played a great role in this.
VYSHINSKY: He praised fascism?
•
KHODJAYEV: I understand it as praise for fascism. He
said that fascist Germany was now exerting every effort to secure
hegemony in Europe, that the method Germany had adopted for
this was the fascization of the whole of Europe, the fascization
of Germany, and in this way to create the necessary conditions
in European countries for the creation of a European bloc, or of
w_hat is called a place d'armes. Agreements were being arranged
with the big Asiatic states, with japan in particular, that an
agreement between fascist Germany and japan to fight the U.S.S.R.
was possible. We had long known of Hitler's intentions, and a
wor~ or two was enough to understand what it was all about.
From this he drew the conclusion that a bloc of these two fascist
states, the alliance of these two states, the fascization of Europe,
would make it difficult for the U.S.S.R. to hold out in a war, and
that the U.S.S.R. was doomed to defeat in such a war. Then he
reviewed the internal situation in the U.S.S.R.-the diffi230

culties encountered in the rural districts. He said collectivization had triumphed, but nevertheless there were considerable
strata of the rural population who had not joined the collective
farms-these were the individual peasants, and we should take
their discontent into account. There were enormous shortcomings
in the collective farms, the collective farms had not yet taken
sufficient root. Although industrialization had triumphed, industry was working with interruptions, there were enormous
shortcomings in industry, the industry manufacturing articles
of general consumption was ina worse state than the rest, there were
such defects in the sphere of commodity circulation that enormous
additional discontent among the population was inevitable. From
this he drew the conclusion that we must stimulate the activity of
our counter-revolutionaryforces. Ikramov was out of Tashkent at the
time. When he returned I informed him about this conversation
with Bukharin, and as I had assured Bukharin in my own name
and in Ikramov's name that we would carry out these instructions, we began to carry them out.
I now come to my concrete wrecking activities. I have already
said something about wrecking. I will briefly deal with agriculture
again. In agriculture our wrecking task was to mix up the rotation of crops. This we carried out in the course of the First and
Second Five-Year Plans. Rotation of crops, either on irrigated
or on non-irrigated lands no longer exists in Uzbekistan. Our task
was to mix up the cultivation of seeds. This task we carried out, but
thanks to the measures taken by the Central Committee of the
C.P.S. U. (Bolsheviks) and the government of the Union, the
cotton seed situation has been straightened out, but as far as the
other crops are concerned, they are still in the position that we
put them in. Our task was to cause discontent' among the peasant
population by means of harsh administration and by overdoing things. We achieved our object to some extent. I have already told you about the inflated cotton plans, about sending
wrong plans to the districts, about the difference between Bokhara and Perghana on the one hand, and between Samarkand and
Tashkent on the other. By this means we succeeded in rousing a
number of provocative actions, a number of actions due to our
provocation. Then we succeeded in causing considerable damage
in livestock raising. I have already told you how we approached
this business. I want to quote one more concrete example. According
to the decision of the Party and the government, we should in
1936 have provided the collective farmers with about 130,000
calves, sheep and other cattle. We did it during the whole
course of the year. In taking stock of the cattle for the second
half of 1936 and the first half of 1937 we found that of these
130,000 animals, only 30,000-40,000 had remained. I have

231

in mind young cattle. What had become of the rest? In the first
place, part of these cattle never reached the peasants at all. Our people who were in charge of the district and area administrations
took these calves and sheep for themselves and then killed them
and sold them. Secondly, no arrangements were made in the collective farms for saving the young cattle. As you know, this
requires an enormous amount of work. I shall not speak about
the disruption of the measures to breed thoroughbred livestock,
veterinary measures, etc. This concrete example is sufficient, I
think, and there is no need for me to go more widely into the question. In the sphere of silk cultivation, we carried out the following wrecking measure. In 1928 we had 7,000-8,000 tons of raw silk;
now, however, we have 10,000-12,000 tons. But proper calculation
of the possibi Ii ties of Uzbekistan in this field showed approximately 22,000-23,000 tons. This could have been achieved had we
not carried out a certain measure. The Court knows, of course,
that agriculture is being mechanized, that is, tractors and machines
are being introduced; but in Uzbekistan the fields are small and
are intersected with irrigation canals. There is not a canal in Uzbekistan that is not lined with mulberry trees. This tree provides
the food for the silkworms. There is a plan which permits 1 or
2 per cent of the old trees to be cut down annually and to be replaced with new ones in a different place. We, on the pretext
that agriculture could not be mechanized, that tractors could not
be employed where there were no large fields, that it was not
economical, that it would cause loss, on the plea of mechanization,
ordered 10 per cent of the mulberry trees to be cut down and by
that destroyed the food base for silk cultivation. If this had not
been exposed by people who had done this themselves, if this
had not been spoken of by the specialist collective farmers, who are
better specialists than anybody in this business, if they had not
spoken about it, it would have been altogether difficult to guess
that there was wrecking here. But it is a fact. The fact is that we carried out this wrecking under a good trade mark. To the people who
objected to cutting down the mulberry trees we said: "Are you
opposed to mechanization? Are you opposed to the Party line? That
meansthatyouarean opportunist. You will have to be dealt with."
These are the wrecking measures that we carried out in Uzbekistan.
I will not deal with lucerne, which alternates with cotton
and is one of the principal crops in the rotation, lucerne, which'
was almost completely destroyed for wrecking purposes. Only
during the past two years it is being restored as a result of the
direct pressure of the Central Committee of the C.P.S. U. (Bolsheviks). Towards the end we received telegrams every week signed
by Stalin: "Why is Iucerne lagging? Why are you not sowing?n

232

It is only as a result of this pressure that we began to improve
the situation as regards lucerne.
Nor will I speak of a number of other wrecking activities in
the sphere of agriculture.
As for industry, I can speak of it only in general terms, as
this was immediately directed by Karimov, to whom Ikramov
referred here. I was mainly in touch with agricultural affairs.
I have forgotten to mention two diversionist acts that were
committed in the sphere of irrigation. The first was in connection
with the Ravatkhadja dam, built by the Soviet government,
a huge water distributor dividing the waters of the river Zaravshan, a river which irrigates 2,000-3,000 hectares of land. In
the beginning of 1936 Khalbatyrov, a member of our organization, was preparing a diversionist act-the destruction or damaging of this dam. He failed because he and his accomplices were
arrested in time by the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs.
A similar attempt was also made in Ferghana upon a large water
distributor dam which irrigates the fields of nearly half of Ferghana. The perpetrators of this act also failed to carry it out in
its entirety, although it was partly carried out by Rakhmanov,
chief of the Uzbek Water Conservancy, who was also a member
of our organization.
VYSH INS KY: What water distributing dams have you in mind?
KHODJAYEV: The first is the Ravatkhadja, and the second
is Kompyr Ravat in Ferghana.
As regards industry, I know about the wrecking at the Chirchik construction job. This is a huge construction job involving the
erection of three electric stations and a nitrate plant. The chief
of construction was Rozit. He was a Right in the past and is
one now. I, like lkramov and other members of our organization,
know that Rozit engaged in wrecking activities there. As I understood it, the wrecking consisted of three things. First, in increasing the cost of construction. Secondly, in using materials
of which there was a shortage, for buildings of secondary importance. For example, everybody knows that in Tashkent the best
buildings arc built of brick, while ordinary houses are bui It of clay.
But on this co.nstruction job one-story houses were built of reinforced concrete, when there was a shortage of cement and iron
for the power stations.
Thirdly and lastly, this wrecking consisted in driving out
of Chirchik people who were loyal to the Soviet government.
Some time ago the Soviet press reported the case of Silberstein.
This has direct bearing on the matter in hand.
VYSHINSKY: What was this case, and what bearing has it
on the matter in hand?
KHODJAYEV: Silberstein was a very efficient and loyal

230

engineer. She was in charge of the erection of the dam at
Chirchik. She belonged to the group of specialists who were
actively and honestly doing Soviet work. But Rozit got rid of
her on various pretexts.
VYSHINSKY: With your knowledge?
KHODJAYEV: Certainly. We raised no objections.
VYSHINSKY: On your instructions?
KHODJAYEV: No, not on my instructions, because I had
no direct connections with Rozit. But we certainly raised no
objections.
VYSHINSKY: And did you know that Rozit was engaged in
wrecking activities?
KHODJAYEV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: From objective facts?
KHODJAYEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And you shielded him?
KHODJAYEV: Yes, I did. Ha<l I really wanted to bring tliis
matter to light, what could have prevented me two years ago from
writing a letter demanding Rozit's dismissal and prosecution?
But I did not want to do this.
The second case was the Kuvasai State District Power Stationa big power station of 48,000-50,000 kw., which is being erected
in the Ferghana Valley to supply electricity to all or nearly all
the industry of Ferghana. The work of construction has dragged
on for a very long time. And this was not fortuitous.
Here, simultaneously with my evidence about wrecking in
Uzbekistan, I want to say what happened in Moscow. The ramp
for the delivery of coal was planned for a capacity of 75,000 kw.,
whereas the power house was built for 48,000 kw., and the planned
capacity of the station is 70,000 kw. You see, therefore, that the
elements of wrecking were present in the very planning of the
station. There have been considerable elements of wrecking in
construction work in Uzbekistan, for the bulk of the resources and
forces were concentrated on the preparatory work and not on the
station.
And lastly, what was caused in Moscow was the systematic failure to supply machines, and that is why the station,
work on which was started practically in 1929-30, has been under
construction for seven years and is not completed yet.
A number of similar wrecking acts were committed in Bokhara,
Samarkand and a number of other places.
VYSHINSKY: At the Khilkovo Cement Works?
KHODJAYEV: The works were stopped, ostensibly for repairs, for re-equipment and modernization, although this could
have been done two or three years later, after the.Kuvasai Cement
Works were started at full capacity; and there was no need to do

234

that, it could have been done later and another plant started
first; nevertheless it was done without waiting. In this way the
Chir-chik Irrigation Project was left without cement. The cement
had to be brought from Novorossisk, and you know what our roads
are like.
VYSHINSKY: Then there were the sulphur mines.
KHOOJAYEV: I had no direct contact with the group that
was working at Shor-Su.
VYSHINSKY: You mean that was wrecking?
KHOOJAYEV: I have wrecking in mind all the time. I do
not know that any of the members of our group had direct connections with them. But one thing was absolutely clear to me;
in Tashkent I more or less gave utterance to this formula, and I say
now, that the sulphur mines did not go out of action themselves,
but because of a fire, because Nevsky, an old Trotskyite, who
had been sent there by Pyatakov, brought about the fire and
explosion in the mine.
What do I regard myself as being guilty of in this respect?
First, that after this happened, Nevsky should have been immediately arrested, if we had honestly, in a Soviet manner, desired to go
into the matter and investigate the whole situation on the spot.
Instead of that we started correspondence with Moscow, hoping
that someone would take him under his w!ng; all the time we were
asking: "Should Nevsky be prosecuted or not?" However, Nevsky
was arrested after all-I think he confessed to his crimes.
Well, so much for industry. I repeat that I cannot speak about
industry in greater detail because I did not have direct charge of
this business.
Further, I want to deal with the question of construction.
The slow tempo of construction in Uzbekistan was ascribed to
the shortage of building materials-cement, iron and timber-but
construction was deliberately disrupted. Take the building of
schools, for example. What is needed mostly are bricks. In Uzbekistan billions of bricks can be made on the spot. And yet, as
a rule, no bricks were available in the building season.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
KHOO JAYEV: Because brick-making was in the charge of
Rakhman, a member of the Trotskyite organization, directed by
Tsekher, who was connected with us. I think the reason is clear.
VYSHINSKY: Of course.
KHOO JA YEV: The same thing applies to hospitals and a
number of other cultural and educational institutions. I will
not speak about a big task which we set ourselves long a~o and
which we carried out. We took the control of the schools m our
hands. In this matter nobody, of course, could compete with us in
Uzbekistan. We trained bourgeois-nationalist cadres and used

235

them to capture the schools and universities. I would not undertake
to say that all the schools were bourgeois-nationalistically inclined,
that all the children were educated in this spirit, but at all events,
we achieved great success in this, particularly in. the universities and other higher educational establishments. Again, it is
difficult for me to speak in detai 1 because this was a branch that
was directed by Ikramov alone. The sphere of culture and ideology
was under Ikramov's direct charge. Agriculture was directed by
Ikramov and me, and industry by Karimov and me. That was
the way the work was distributed.
As for carrying out other instructions~to organize insurrectionary groups in Uzbekistan-we were afraid to undertake
this ourselves because this could be discovered at once. That is
why, after a conference with Ikramov, we jointly gave verbal
instructions to our people who were secretaries of district committees
and chairmen of executive committees to make preparations to
organize a nucleus, through the medium of which it would be possible to proceed to the mass organization of insurrection. This
was one instruction.
The other instruction was to organize groups in the villages
consisting of amnestied Basmachis who had surrendered long ago,
in 1922-23. Such were the instructions. In the districts this work
was carried on, that is, people were enlisted, groups were formed,
although I cannot say now how many groups were formed, or who
was leading each group, because I have not the data at hand .
. VYSHINSKY: Did you organize these groups?
KHODJAYEV: Instructions were given to organize them.
VYSHINSKY: And were these instructions carried out?
KHOO JA YEV: They were.
VYSHINSKY: Then why was Bukharin dissatisfied?
KHODJAYEV: Bukharin spoke to me in August 1936.
VYSHINSKY: And when did this happen?
KHODJAYEV: This was later. As for the terrorist groups,
I did not speak to anybody about it except two persons. I knew
about it, Ikramov knew and it was also known by a person named
Sher-Mukhamedov, whom, after consulting with Ikramov, I entrusted with the task of organizing these terrorist groups. The
reasons Ikramov gave for entrusting him with the task was that
he was the most reliable person, knew the rural population, and knew
our cadres. "He ought to be entrusted with the job; I will speak
to him myself," he said.
VYSHINSKY: It was Ikramov who found him, and not you?
KHODJAYEV: No, but there was no need to look for him; he
was a well-known person, he was a member of the Bureau of the
Central Cornrnittee, both of us knew him; and when I consulted

236

with lkramov as to whom to entrust with this job, he said that
Muslam Sher-Mukhamedov should be entrusted with it.
VYSHINSKY: He was Ikramov's candidate?
KHODJAYEV: I would not say that. He was, so to speak,
the candidate of both of us.
VYSHINSKY: He was your joint candidate?
KHODJAYEV: Our joint candidate. I do not know whether
lkramov spoke to Sher-Mukhamedov, but I do know that SherMukhamedov did do some work in the villages as well as among
the students; he said that he had a couple of groups.
VYSHINSKY: I want to question Ikramov.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ikramov, is Khodjayev telling the
truth about Sher-Mukhamedov?
IKRAMOV: The candidacy of Sher-Mukhamedov was discussed.
VYSHINSKY: With what object?
IKRAMOV: He was given instructions about terrorism. He
did not say whether he had instructed Sher-Mukhamedov. This
part is unknown, but that the candidature was discussed is true.
VYSHINSKY: That it was necessary to prepare for terrorist
acts?
IKRAMOV: Yes, he spoke in Bukharin's name.
KHODJAYEV: And now the last point, this is about connections with England. It was impossible for me personally to
establish direct connections with England. Some means had to be
sought for this. I could find people in Tadjikistan, because there
the Basmachi movement continued until recent times, so that
several English emissaries and others might be there. So I presumed.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you presume so?
KHODJAYEV: I say thqt the Basmachi movement continued
there up to 1930, whereas in Uzbekistan the Basmachi movement
was liquidated in 1922-23. Consequently, it was more likely that
I could establish connections there.
VYSHINSKY: Through the Basmachis?
KHODJAYEV: Through the Kurbashis, that is, the Basmachi
chiefs.
VYSHINSKY: Why do you think so?
KHODJAYEV: I did not finish what I wanted to say.
VYSHINSKY: Please go on.
KHODJAYEV: A Kurbashi, if he is a real Basmachi chief,
is bound to have connections with the English, because the Basmachi movement was organized with the help of the English.
VYSHINSKY: Do you speak from experience?
KHODJAYEV: I am stating the facts.
I could find people among the Tadjikistan officials who could

237

earry out this task. 1 remembered a man named Maxum, the for·
mer Chairman of the Central Executive Committee of Tadjikistan,
whom I had known since 1922, when East Tadjikistan was still
a part of Bokhara. Well, I wanted to entrust him with the job.
I was aware of his pro-English inclinations, and he had often
expressed dissatisfaction with Soviet policy. Knowing these
sentiments of his, I wanted to use him.
VYSHINSKY: And Mukhitdinov, who was he?
KHOO JAYEV: Mukhitdinov was one of the leading men in
the Bokhara bourgeois-nationalist party.
VYSHINSKY: Of what orientation?
KHOO JAYEV: British orientation. He had been working
since 1924. I am not referring to him because he is dead, and it is
no use referring to a dead man.
VYSHINSKY: There is history.
KHOOJAYEV: For history there was such a man. This Maxum
was his man.
VYSHINSKY: That is why I asked about him.
KHOO JAYEV: Quite right. But happily for me I need not
add this crime to the enormous crimes I have committed against
the Soviet people and against the Party. I mean I cannot add it
in this sense, that I agreed with the instructions, accepted them
for execution, tried to execute them, but did not succeed in
executing them.
VYSHINSKY: For reasons over which you had no control?
KHOOJAYEV: Yes, over which I had no control. I would
like to finish my evidence by stating that, of course, I am not an
infant, I began my anti-Soviet activities consciously, as a nationalist, for before I came over to the revolution and took part in
it, I was a nationalist.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us what social stratum you belonged to by
origin.
KHODJAYEV: I come from a merchant family.
VYSHINSKY: What was your father?
KHOO JAYEV: A merchant.
VYSHINSKY: A big one or a small one?
KHODJAYEV: A big one. He traded in Persian Iamb. He
died in 1912. I was left at the age of fourteen.
VYSHINSKY: What do you mean, you were left?
KHOOJAYEV: My father's business passed into the hands
of a guardian. At the age of sixteen I joined an underground organization-I regarded it as an underground organization,
and in fact it was, and later it worked against the Emir.
VYSHINSKY: After your father's death did you continue
the business?

238

KHODJAYEV: l could not do that; I was fourteen years of
age. Everything passed to my uncle, the guardian. The property
was divided up in 1917. I received the house, part of the land,
and so forth, amounting to about 17,000 rubles. This can be proved
by documents.
VYSHINSKY: Had you any connections with bourgeois circles as a result of your past social position?
KHODJAYEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: When you subsequently headed the wrecking
organization in Uzbekistan, did you engage in wrecking activities
in Persian lamb breeding?
KHOO JAYEV: Not directly. But in the collective farms in
1931 there was a loss of cattle under the direction of a man
named Khismetov. Our officials . . .
VYSHINSKY: Who is "our"?
KHODJAYEV: Of our camp, mine and Ikramov's, although
we did not do it with our own hands.
VYSHINSKY: I understand that, you could not do everything with your own hands. Was there any wrecking done?
KHODJAYEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you organize it?
KHOOJAYEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you say nothing about it when you
were talking about wrecking in agriculture?
KHOO JAYEV: When I was talking about agriculture I thought
this was understood.
VYSHINSKY: What organization did you belong to before
the revolution?
KHOO JAYEV: The organization I belonged to was the party
of the Bokhara liberals, a constitutional-monarchist party.,
VYSHINSKY: A Cadet Party?
KHOOJAYEV: Yes. In 1917 I left this party and was one of
the organizers of another party-the Young Bokhara Party, the
program of which we published in 1917. Our object was the bourgeois-nationalist development of Bokhara. I belonged to this
party.
After the events of March 1916, when I took part, a leading
part, in the armed risings against the Emir's government, I was
outlawed and sentenced to death, but I fled to tsarist Russia;
there I stayed from March 1916 to the middle of 1919, and at the
end of 1919 I found myself in Tashkent. There I held a leading post. This was also the case in 1920. I took part in overthrowing the Emir. I would like . . .
VYSHINSKY: Later you rejoined the nationalists? ·
239

KHODJAYEV: Later, when l was at the head of the government, I rejoined the nationalists.
VYSHINSKY: And since then you have pursued this line?
KHOO JAYEV: Since then I have pursued this line.
VYSHINSKY: And Bukharin helped you?
KHODJAYEV: This is what I am saying. I began my activities as a nationalist, travelled a great and long road-twentythree years out of forty-one. I have been in rhany a fray, but that
is not important; what is important, what is particularly painful
and humiliating to me-and I am myself to blame for it-is
that, thanks to my own actions, I find myself in the dock, side
by side with people who set themselves the aim of striking at the
revolution, with people who shrank from no methods to achieve
their goal. And I myself, having carried out a number of measures,
in no way differ from them. I have betrayed not only the people
of Bokhara, of Uzbekistan, but also of the Soviet Union as a whole;
I have repaid with black ingratitude those who in 1917 and in
1918, when I was outlawed and had nowhere to lay my head,
threw wide open the gates of hospitality to me, gave me a refuge, and tried to educate me so that I might develop. I have
betrayed the people who helped the nations of Bokhara to overthrow
the detested despotism of the Emir, to overthrow mediaeval
tyranny. I have betrayed the Party thanks to whose policy the
political and economic, inequality that existed for over half a
century was abolished. I have betrayed the people and the Party
which gave Bokhara its independence, not independence in the
bourgeois sense, but Soviet independence. I feel my position to
be particularly grave because I am thrice a criminal-as a nationalist, as a member of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," and
as one who has betrayed the confidence of Stalin, of the leaders of
the Party and of the government. I was educated, I was assisted,
I was dragged out of difficult situations when I found myself in
them; as for example in 1923, when I committed a mistake and
assistance was offered me. But in spite of al 1 this I betrayed all
these people, betrayed Stalin on the instructions of the Right
centre. I took part in organizing terrorist groups. That is why I
bear full responsibility before the Soviet Court, before the Soviet
people. f know that my belated repentance will not help matters,
but I am saying this in order that it may perhaps warn at least
somebody not to follow in my footsteps.
VYSHINSKY: What do you know about the murder of Abid
Saidov?
KHODJAYEV: I heard about it in 1931.
VYSHINSKY: What do you know about the murder of Abid
Saidov?
240

KHODJAYEV: I heard about it from two sources. There was
a man named Said Akhmet. Said Akhmet was a Soviet judge,
a Tashkent man. He was the one who exposed the Kasymov case.
After Kasymov's trial a campaign was started against him in
• Uzbekistan. He came to me, not knowing that I was a member
of this organization, and asked for my protection. There, he said,
r have done a Soviet job, I exposed scoundrels and now I am being
persecuted. I pacified him, and once r even spoke to Ikramov
about him, urging him not to touch him-why should a man be
persecuted? Don't forget that this was in 1930, when we were not
yet what we are now. . . .
VYSHINSKY: Not quite what you are now?
KHODJAYEV: Not quite. Well, it was at that time that Said
Akhmet told me that the man you are asking me about, Abid
Saidov-he was then a member of the Collegium of the People's
Commissariat of Education-had been murdered by his own
brother.
VYSHfNSKY: Had Abid Saidov also exposed criminals?
KHODJAYEV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Why was he killed?
KHODJAYEV: He was an active witness at the trial. He was
killed by his brother by order of the nationalist organization
"Milli-Istiklal." . . .
VYSHINSKY: Which was led by whom?
KHOD JAYEV: At that time I did not know who led it . . . .
VYSHINSKY: Of which who was a member?
' KHOD JAYEV: Of which Ikramov was a member.
VYSHINSKY: And had Ikramov anything to do with this
i
affair?
KHODJAYEV: I know nothing about it, and can say nothing.
VYSHINSKY: But what were you told?
KHOD JAYEV: I was told that Ikramov at least protected
these people. Said Akhmet did not directly refer to Ikramov; perhaps he was afraid to, because Ikramov was the secretary. The second
person who told me this was Abidova, who is at present the permanent representative of Uzbekistan in Moscow. She was the
women's organizer or the director of the women's department
at that time. She acted as public prosecutor in that trial. She is
a fairly active woman and took a very active part in the trial.
She told me then, and quite recently, in June or July 1937, once
more repeated it, that this Aoid Saidov was killed by nationalists,
that not all the murderers were exposed, that not everything has
been divulged, that they have not all been punished, that Ikramov protected these murderers; but she did not tell me that
Ikramov took any part in it or anything of the kind.
16

241

VYSHfNSKY: Allow n1e to question the accused Ikramov.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ikramov, was there such a fact as
the murder of Abid Saidov?
IKRAMOV: There was such a fact.
VYSHINSKY: Why was he murdered?
IKRAMOV: I know nothing about this affair directly from
the perpetrators of the murder because I was not there.
VYSHINSKY: Why was he murdered?
IKRAMOV: I can only say what I know officially.
VYSHINSKY: What do you know?
IKRAMOV: I know officially that at the trial of the "MilliIstiklal" he exposed the counter-revolutionaries and was killed
on the instructions of this group.
VYSHINSKY: What group killed him?
IKRAMOV: The "Milli-Istiklal" group.
VYSHINSKY: Were you a member of this group?
IKRAMOV: I was.
VYSHINSKY: When was that?
IKRAMOV: In 1930.
VYSHINSKY: Who was the head of this group then?
IKRAMOV: Of the "Milli-Istiklal"?
VYSHINSKY: Yes.
IKRAMOV: I have said that since 1928 I have been a member,
have led it, and am responsible.
VYSHINSKY: Did you hold a leading position in this group
in 1930?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Who led it?
IKRAMOV: The chairman was Karimov. At that time we
had one aim-to seize the higher educational institutions, to fill
them with class enemies of the Soviet power and to train cadres.
That was the fundamental line.
VYSHINSKY: And incidentally, murdered Abid Saidov?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Who murdered him?
IKRAMOV: I can give the official material which I know.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you 'II tell us about the unofficial
material? Why was Abid Saidov killed? Was Batu one of the
murderers of Abid Saidov?
IKRAMOV: For having exposed the bourgeois nationalists.
Batu was one of the murderers.
VYSHINSKY: Was this the Batu who, like Ramzi, was your
man?
242

IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: So Abid Saidov was murdered by Batu, youf
man?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment until 6 p. m.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER
MHitary Jurist First Rank

EVENING SESSION, MARCH 4, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please he seated. The session is resumed.
We shall proceed to the examination of the accused Rosengoltz.
Do you confirm the testimony you gave at the preliminary investigation?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any questions?
VYSHINSKY: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Please put them.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rosengoltz, tell us briefly about your
criminal activities, beginning from the moment that opened the
road for you to the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
ROSENGOLTZ: I shall say a few words about an earlier period.
As you know, I was a m~mber of the Trotskyite trade union opposition during the trade union discussion in 1920-21. Then, in
1923, I signed what was known as the "Platform of the Forty-Six,"
although with considerable reservations.
At the beginning of 1925 I began to entertain certain differences
with Trotsky in connection with the demand I made of him that he
should admit the erroneousness of the theory of so-called "permanent revolution." He categorically refused to do this and the result was a certain cooling off of relations and certain divergences.
My relations with Trotsky were restored, although not directly.
In 1929 Krestinsky broug-ht me Trotsky's instructions that I and
Krestinsky should conceal our real attitude and as far as possible
occupy responsible posts, mai ntai ni ng a waiting attitude until
the necessary forces in the country should, as Trotsky thought,
gain the upper hand and we could take part in the organization of
a new power.
This was the situation roughly unti 11933. In 1933, in connection
with the new directions and with our own decisions, we entered
upon the path of greater or, to speak frankly, of intensive criminal
activities.
Firstly, what meetings did I have during this time?
Krestinsky's letter was received at the beginning of 1933.
244

VYSHINSKY: But before 1933, say in 1929, were you in correspondence with Trotsky when Trotsky was already abroad?
ROSENGOLTZ: You are referring to 1929?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, I ask you, were you in correspondence with
Trotsky in 1929? Or perhaps you received through a third person,
or in written form, instructions from Trotsky?
ROSENGOLTZ: The chief thing was the arrival of Krestinsky,
who transmitted verbal instructions.
VYSHINSKY: And so in 1929 Krestinsky brought you instructions from Trotsky?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What have you to say on this score, accused
Kresti nsky?
KRESTINSKY: There is a certain inaccuracy here. I met
Trotsky's son at the end of 1929. I was at that time working abroad
and could transmit these instructions to Rosengoltz only at the
beginning of 1930.
VYSHINSKY: The difference between the end of 1929 and the
beginning of 1930 is not a big one. What I want to establish is
whether you actually did transmit certain instructions to R~sen­
goltz from Trotsky. And so this was at the end of 1929, or at the beginning of 1930?
ROSENGOLTZ: I have already said so.
VYSHINSKY: And so, at the end of 1929, or rather at the beginning of 1930, you received certain instructions through Kresti nsky?
ROSENGOLTZ: I have already said so.
Further, in 1933 Krestinsky received a letter from abroad. Then,
when Krestinsky was abroad himself, he had a meeting. I was
abroad in 1933 and had a meeting with Sedov in Felden in Austria.
I had several long conversations with him near the house where
I lived. I next saw Sedov in 1934 in Karlsbad.
VYSH INS KY: What was the substance of your conversations?
ROSENGOLTZ: Sedov transmitted the following basic instructions from Trotsky. I shall here set forth the instructions which
I received during my conversations with Sedov and which were
transmitted through Krestinsky; in the main they coincided. This
is with regard to connections with the Rights. It was recommended
to form connections with the Rights and to carry on the work in
contact with them.
VYSHINSKY: With whom specifically?
ROSENGOLTZ: That I was not told. Krestinsky told me about
it, but mentioned no names, except Tukhachevsky's.
VYSHINSKY: But it was understood?
ROSENGOLTZ: Krestinsky said that he had instructions with
regard to Rykov an.d Rudzutak. Sedov spoke a lot about tbe

245

necessity of the maximum, the closest possible connections with
Tukhachevsky, inasmuch as, in Trotsky's opinion, Tukhachevsky
and the military group were to be the decisive force of the counterrevolutionary action. During the conversation it was also revealed
that Trotsky entertained fears regarding Tukhachevsky's Bonapartist tendencies. In the course of one conversation Sedov said
that Trotsky in this respect even expressed the fear that if Tukhachevsky successfully accomplished a military coup, it was possible
that he would not allow Trotsky into Moscow, and in this connection
he referred to the necessity for the greatest vigilance on our part.
In fulfilment of these directions regarding connections ...
VYSHINSKY: In what was this vigilance to consist?
ROSEN GOLTZ: Trotsky therefore proposed that during the coup
d'etat we should everywhere place our own people, people who
would be faithful to Trotskyism and who could be relied upon as
regards vigilance. I will not mention a number of technical trifles
which are of no significance here.
In fulfilment of these instructions, Kresti nskyformed connections
with Tukhachevsky. During the whole of this period, from 1933 to
1937, I had connections with Rykov and Rudzutak. The most important subject of these conversations with Sedov was the proposed
composition of the government.
VYSHINSKY: Well, we can speak about thata little later on. For
the present tell us about the substance of your criminal activities.
ROSENGOLTZ: I shall enumerate the main points. Sedov also
conveyed directions from Trotsky about the organization of terrorism, stating that at that period these instructions about terrorism should have no direct practical bearing on Krestinsky and
myself from motives of secrecy, since special instructions were being
given on this score to the terrorist organization of Ivan Nikitich
Smirnov. In 1933 directions and instructions were received with
regard to wrecking in the sphere of foreign trade. As Sedov had told
me that Trotsky had an agreement with certain German circles,
from this standpoint wrecking was of very essential importance to
Trotsky for the maintenance of his prestige and the preservation
of the agreement. The principal line in wrecking was to
further the interests of Germany and japan in the sphere of foreign
trade. The question was then raised-and it was put several times
and very persistently on the part of Trotsky and Sedov-of financing the Trotskyite movement through the channels of foreign trade.
In 1935-36 there was also a certain exchange of letters between Moscow and abroad on these questions. I shall dwell on the
letter of 1937, which Krestinsky received already after the Pyatakov trial.
VYSHINSKY: This was already in 1937?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, yes.
246

VYSHINSKY: And somewhat earlier? I would like to dwell,
let us say, on 1935 or even 1934, that second meeting of yours in
Karlsbad.
ROSENGOLTZ: I have spoken about that.
VYSHINSKY: I know that you have spoken about it. How
was the question of war put on that occasion?
ROSENGOLTZ: In regard to war, Trotsky's line was for defeat.
VYSHINSKY: Was it expected that there would be a war?
When?
ROSENGOLTZ: In 1935 or 1936.
VYSHINSKY: So Trotsky expected that a war would break
out in 1935-36. and in this connection . . .
ROSEN GOLTZ: The question of a coup was raised. Furthermore,
a change in the line took place here, because at first it was a question of the desirability and necessity for effecting a military coup
to coincide with the period of the possible, outbreak of war. Only
a difference of a few weeks could have been involved. And then, in
view of the obvious delay of the war, the desirability of expediting
the coup was urged-this was already in 1937-without awaiting
military events.
VYSHINSKY: Very good. And so in 1934, during your conversations with Sedov, reference was made to a war in 1935-36 and
it was said that the stake should be on defeat.
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you not have occasion in 1934 to speak to
any of the leaders of the bloc on this subject?
ROSENGOLTZ: I cannot remember so precisely with regard to
1934; it is difficult to recall individual dates.
VYSHINSKY: But did you meet Rykov in 1934?
ROSENGOLTZ: I certainly did. At any rate, such an exchange
and contact did exist after the receipt of these instructions.
VYSHINSKY: They did exist?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Continue.
ROSENGOLTZ: In 1937 . . .
VYSHINSKY: Before going on to 1937, just one other question.
Did you have occasion to speak to Rykov on this subject in 1936?
ROSEN GOLTZ: There was talk about this throughout this
period: in 1934, in 1935 and in 1936.
VYSHINSKY: Preparations were being made?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, yes. Rykov chiefly staked on and hoped
for an uprising in the countryside.
VYSHINSKY: This was before 1936, but what was the chief
stake in 1936?
ROSENGOLTZ: On a military coup, on Tukhachevsky's group.
VYSHINSKY: Do you not recall what Rykov's attitude was
247

generally towards the delay of the counter-revolutionary action?
ROSENGOLTZ: He regarded the delay of action very unfavourably.
VYSHINSKY: He was nervous?
ROSENGOLTZ: He was very nervous, of course. Rykov and
others feared that the delay might result in a number of exposures.
VYSHINSKY: Did Rykov tell you that Tukhachevsky was
promising to act, but did not act?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And who else said this?
ROSENGOLTZ: This was also said by Krestinsky, and Sedov
transmitted Trotsky's opinion. So that this was a constant and
basic subject in the conversations.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to question the accused Krestinsky
and Rykov.
Accused Krestinsky, do you confirm the testimony of the
accused Rosengoltz?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, but there is some, relatively insignificant, inaccuracy.
VYSHINSKY: But in the main?
KRESTINSKY: In the main, yes. But the inaccuracy is that
I did not receive a letter from Trotsky in 1933, at the beginning
of the year. rt was Radek, apparently, who received a letter from
him.
VYSHfNSKY: And did you know about the letter to Radek?
KRESTINSKY: I knew about it from Radek.
VYSHINSKY: Did he show it to you?
KRESTINSKY: No, he told me about it.
VYSHINSKY: And so you knew?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I did. But I began to receive letters
after the meeting in Meran, and I spoke to Tukhachevsky not in
1933, but in 1934.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Krestinsky, tell us, did you tell Rosengoltz in 1936 that Tukhachevsky was procrastinating with the
counter-revolutionary action?
KRESTINSKY: I did, but in my opinion it was in a different
way.
VYSHINSKY: Did you speak on this subject, or not?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. The fact of the matter is that in 1933
Trotsky spoke to me in Meran and developed the defeatist theory
in dethil.
VYSHINSKY: You will tell us about that later. Just now.
in connection with the testimony which the Court has heard from
the accused Rosengoltz, who stated that in 1936 Rykov was

248

nervous and said that Tukhachevsky kept on appointing
dates for the execution of his criminal plan-an uprising-and
postponing them. Rosengoltz said that Krestinsky also spoke of
this. I ask, is it true?
KRESTINSKY: That is not so, because on Trotsky's instructions, it was agreed with Tukhachevsky from the very beginning
that the action should be timed with war. At the end of 1936 the
question was raised simultaneously both by Trotsky abroad, in
the letter to Radek, and by Tukhachevsky himself, that the coup
should be expedited and not be timed to the outbreak of war.
VYSHINSKY: That is, to act without waiting for war?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: That is, to expedite war, to hurry?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And so Tukhachevsky was in a hurry?
KRESTINSKY: At the end of 1936 Tukhachevsky began to be
in a hurry.
VYSHINSKY: And did you hurry him at that time?
KRESTINSKY: I agreed with him.
VYSHINSKY: Did you hurry him, or not?
KRESTINSKY: I did not hurry him, but f agreed with him.
VYSHINSKY: And so you thought that the counter-revolutionary action should be expedited, that is, you should hurry.
If you held that view, it means that you hurried him?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, but it was at a later period.
VYSHINSKY: At the end of 1936? What I must know is
whether you were possessed with impatience, whether you were
in a hurry to expedite Tukhachevsky's uprising, and whether you
told Rosengoltz about this.
KRESTlNSKY: Yes, in 1936.
VYSHINSKY: And so he is telling the truth?
KRESTINSKY: This was in November 1936.
VYSHINSKY: But November 1936 is 1936?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to question the accused Rykov.
Accused Rykov, is the accused Rosengoltz stating the matter
correctly?
RYKOV: With regard to Tukhachevsky?
VYSHINSKY: Did you speak to Tukhachevsky?
RYKOV: To Tukhachevsky? No.
VYSHfNSKY: Did you speak to Rosengoltz?
RYKOV: I spoke to Rosengoltz once or twice._
VYSHfNSKY: About the fact that you were in a hurry? And
did you say that Tukhachevsky must be hurried?

249

RYKOV: No, there was no such talk.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rosengoltz, where did the meeting
take place?
ROSENGOLTZ: The meeting with Alexei lvanovich Rykov
took place in the lobby of the Council of People's Commissars,
and I quite definitely remember that there was such a conversation.
VYSHINSKY: There was?
RYKOV: I just as definitely remember that there was no such
conversation.
VYSHINSKY: But were you aware of the actions which Tukhachevsky was planning?
RYKOV: I stated yesterday that there was a military group,
connected with a coup and a conspiracy.
VYSHINSKY: And do you confirm it today?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You do not recall such a conversation with
Rosengoltz, but the fact itself remains?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: But were you connected with the conspiratorial
group?
RYKOV: I was connected with it through Tomsky and Yenukidze.
VYSHINSKY: Through Tomsky and Yenukidze?
RYKOV: just so.
VYSHINSKY (to Rosengoltz): Do you recall what Krestinsky
and Rykov said on the subject?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: How did you react to the arrest of Pyatakov
in this connection?
ROSENGOLTZ: Already after the trial of Pyatakov a letter
was received from Trotsky in which he put it that Tukhachevsky's
military coup must be expedited to the maximum. There was a
meeting in my apartment in this connection.
VYSHINSKY: What sort of a letter was this, can't you give
more details?
ROSENGOLTZ: Trotsky raised several questions in it. First
of all, he pointed out that if we procrastinated, the result would
be that all the counter-revolutionary forces would be smashed
piecemeal. Therefore, inasmuch as the cadres had already been
considerably demolished, a number of possible actions should be
expedited to the maximum.
VYSHINSKY: For example?
ROSENGOLTZ: Two questions chiefly were raised: the first was
to retaliate to the Court sentence on Pyatakov by terrorist acts.

250

VYSH INSKY: That is, to the sentence of the Court?
ROSENGOLTZ: As a· retaliation to the sentence of the Court
condemning Pyatakov to be shot, it was proposed to organize
terrorist acts.
VYSH f NSKy: Against whom?
ROSENGOLTZ: Against leaders of the Party and the government, and to expedite a military coup to the maximum.
VYSHINSKY: Was there nothing else in this letter?
ROSENGOLTZ: It was demanded that Krestinskyand I should
be more active.
VYSHINSKY: And did not this letter contain Trotsky's
opinion about Pyatakov's conduct in Court? Do you not recall
that Trotsky gave his appraisal of Pyatakov's conduct in Court
in admitting his crimes?
ROSENGOLTZ: I do not exactly remember this point. I have
a clearer recollection of the two points l have mentioned: regarding
the demand for action in Trotsky's proposal to retaliate by terrorist
acts, and the point about expediting a military coup.
VYSHINSKY: These two questions relate to criminal activities
as such, while the third question relates to tactics. (To the Court.)
Permit me to question the accused Krestinsky.
Accused Krestinsky, do you recall what Trotsky wrote in this
letter?
KRESTINSKY: In one of the letters, received in the first
quarter of 1937 along Arkady Pavlovich's lines ...
VYSHINSKY: What does "along Arkady Pavlovich's lines"
mean?
KRESTINSKY: Through his foreign connections.
VYSHINSKY: Through Rosengoltz?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. After Bessonov's departure and his arrest,
my connections were broken. In this letter Trotsky expressed his
disgust with Pyatakov's conduct. He demanded that in future,
in a similar case, we should not behave in this way.
VYSHINSKY: How then to behave?
KRESTINSKY: Not to admit one's guilt.
VYSHINSKY: These were Trotsky's instructions even at that
time?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. It was a sort of detail, an unimportant
part of the letter; it was not regarded as anything of vital importance; a few sentences were devoted to it.
VYSHINSKY: In the preliminary investigation you testified
(p. 72): "The second letter . . . In this letter Trotsky sharp~y
criticized Pyatakov's conduct at the trial and proposed that 1n
the event of further arrests we should not admit our guilt and
refuse to give testimony." ls that correct?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.

251

VYSHINSKY: It was so?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps your conduct in Court two days ago
was also dictated by these directions?
KRESTINSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: But you remembered these instructions of
Trotsky?
KRESTINSKY: I did, but it was not this that dictated my
conduct. It was connected with the facts I mentioned yesterday..
VYSHINSKY: When were you arrested?
KRESTINSKY: At the end of May.
VYSHINSKY: And when did you confess your guilt at the
preliminary investigation?
KRESTINSKY: As to the principal crime, the-6ne that was
hardest of all for me to admit, namely, about my connections
with the German intelligence service and General Seeckt, I confessed after the lapse cf a week, at the first inte rogation.
VYSHINSKY: But for a week you denied it?
KRESTINSKY: I confessed it at the end of the first interrogation.
VYSHINSKY: Was it because you wanted to carry out
Trotsky's instructions that you denied your guilt?
KRESTINSKY: No. I just hoped that I would be believed and
that ...
VYSH INS KY: You would succeed in the deception?
KRESTINSKY: That I would succeed in the deception and
thus save myself.
VYSHINSKY: But you did not succeed!
KRESTINSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rosengoltz, continue.
ROSENGOLTZ: The point I stopped at was the conference we
had with Tukhachevsky. It took place at the end of March. At
the confrontation, Krestinsky introduced a correction and said
that it was at the beginning of April; but the difference is of no
importance. There was a conference with Tukhachevsky.
VYSHINSKY: Where was this conference held?
ROSENGOLTZ: In my apartment.
VYSHINSKY: There was a conference in your apartment.
With whom?
ROSENGOLTZ: With Tukhachevsky and Krestinsky.
VYSHINSKY: When was this conference held? Let me have
the exact date.
ROSENGOLTZ: It was at the end of March 1937.
VYSHINSKY: Continue.
ROSENGOLTZ: At this conference Tukhachevsky stated that
he counted definitely on the possibility of a coup and mentioned

252

the date. He believed that by May 15, in the first half of May,
he would succeed in .:.arrying out this military coup.
VYSHINSKY: What was the plan for this counter-revolutionary
action?
ROSENGOLTZ: Tukhachevsky had a number of variants.
One of them, the one on which he counted most, was the possibility for a group of military men, his adherents, gathering in his
apartment on some pretext or other, making their way into the
Kremlin, seizing the Kremlin telephone exchange, and killing
the leaders of the Party and the government.
VYSHINSKY: Was this his plan, or was it your joint plan?
ROSENGOLTZ: We did not discuss this plan of his. He merely
told us of it as one of the variants on which he placed great
hopes.
VYSHINSKY: And you left it to him to act?
ROSENGOLTZ: Well, of course. We could not go into these
questions.
VYSHINSKY: And why did he inform you of this plan?
ROSENGOLTZ: Inasmuch as we in general advanced the proposition of a military coup.
VYSHINSKY: As the leaders of this action?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, yes.
VYSHINSKY: Of this plot?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, yes.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to ask Krestinsky now. (To Krestinsky.) Do you confirm this?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I do. This conference took place in Rosengoltz's apartment. It was at the beginning of April. At this
conference we referred to Yagoda 's arrest as a fact. I learnt about
Yagoda's arrest on April 2 or 3. So it was in April.
VYSHINSKY: Were you also informed of Yagoda 's part in
the plot?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I spoke about that yesterday.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated.
Accused Rosengoltz, continue.
ROSENGOLTZ: The question of a terrorist act was raised.
Krestinsky and I discussed the possibility there and then
of a terrorist act against Molotov, Chairman of the Council of
People's Commi5sars.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Krestinsky, did you discuss the commission of a terrorist act against Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Molotov?
KRESTINSKY: We discussed the question in a different
way-in its wider aspects ....
VYSHINSKY: Did you discuss this question?
KRESTINSKY: He and I spoke generally about the necessity
of renewing the terrorist activities of the Trotskyites, which had
253

been suspended after the death of Pyatakov, alild 1 discussed this
point with Rosengoltz and Gamarnik. We discussed the necessity
of terrorist acts against the leaders of the Party and the government.
VYSHINSKY: Against whom exactly?
KRESTINSKY: We had in mind Stalin, Molotov and Kaganovich, but we did not discuss specifically a terrorist act against
Molotov in detail.
VYSHINSKY: I am not interested in details. Did you talk
about preparations for a terrorist act against Comrade Molotov?
KRESTINSKY: Not about preparations, but about the necessity for preparations.
VYSHINSKY: And so you discussed the necessity of preparations for a terrorist act in order to commit it?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, of course.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated.
Accused Rosengoltz, continue.
ROSENGOLTZ: Now about certain of the more important
lines of these crimes and criminal activities ....
VYSHINSKY: Allow me first of all to put one question. After
Yagoda 's arrest, did Krestinsky express his demands that the
armed uprising should be expedited?
ROSENGOLTZ: He had expressed this all along, both during
1936 and during 1937.
VYSHINSKY: But after Yagoda 's arrest?
ROSENGOLTZ: I cannot recall with such precision the date of
the arrest, when it took place; but at any rate this should coincide,
because he raised this question in March, and it was raised again
in April.
VYSHINSKY: I am interested in knowing, was Krestinsky's
part in your plot fairly active, or not?
ROSENGOLTZ: Krestinsky put the question quite clearly that
the coup should be expedited.
VYSHINSKY: It is one thing to put the question clearly, it
is another to direct the affair-to hurry, to organize, to insist
upon the execution of the plan of the plot.
ROSENGOLTZ: All the negotiations with Tukhachevsky were
conducted by Krestinsky, with the exception of one conference
which was held in my apartment.
VYSHINSKY: As far as I understand, it was part of your
conception that your principal hope in this criminal design rested
with the Tukhachevsky group. Is that so?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Who held direct and immediate contact with
this group?
RO~ENGOLTZ: Krestinsky.

254

VYSHINSKY: Consequently, in a certain measure, as a member
of the bloc, he organized the activities of this group. Do I understand rightly?
ROSENGOLTZ: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, he played one of the leading
parts in this affair?
ROSENGOLTZ: He hurried Tukhachevsky all the time ....
VYSHINSKY: And when you stated at the preliminary investigation that after Yagoda 's arrest, or even earlier, after Pyatakov's arrest, Krestinsky put the question to Tukhachevsky
particularly sharply, that is how it was in reality? It is indicative
of the energy displayed by Krestinsky in this affair?
ROSENGOLTZ: I have no wish to, and have no grounds for
singling out Krestinsky especially....
VYSHINSKY: You have no grounds, but I have. I am asking
you, as a man who organized this sinister plot together with Krestinsky.
ROSEN GOLTZ: Krestinsky, like myself, considered it necessary
to expedite this coup and systematically hurried Tukhachevsky.
VYSHfNSKY: Accused Krestinsky, is it true that you systematically hurried Tukhachevsky to effect the coup?
KRESTINSKY: Ever since November 1936 I was decidedly
in favour of expediting this coup to the maximum. I had no need
to hurry Tukhachevsky, because he was of the same mind himself,
and he himself put this question to us-to the Rights, to me,
to Rosengoltz and Rudzutak-and asked our consent to carry out
this action without waiting for the armed attack. And so there
was no need to hurry him. Our minds were one on the question
of the coup.
VYSHINSKY (to Rosengoltz): Rosengoltz, why do you assert that
Krestinsky systematically hurried Tukhachevsky to effect the coup?
ROSENGOLTZ: Because he told me about it himself: he said
that he had been conducting negotiations for a considerable time
and that Tukhachevsky was giving him promises and fixing dates
which he did not adhere to.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Krestinsky, did you express the idea
that this act had to be expedited?
KRESTINSKY: I could not do this before November 1936,
because it was obvious to all of us at that time that this action
could not take place before the Soviet Union was attacked by
foreign states. But after this we had talks together and discussed
how the action could be expedited. This was in March 1937, when
from the time of Tukhachevsky's return from his vacation to the
end of March I spoke to him several times on this subject, and
then told Rosengoltz, but not to the effect that Tukhachevsky had
appointed a definite date and was not adhering to it, because

iss

no date whatever was fixed. The talk in Rosengoltzis apartment
was more explicit. Tukhachevsky was preparing to go to London for
the coronation of the King of England so as not to arouse suspicion.
But when it was learnt that his trip had been cancelled, he said
that he would start a revolt in the early part of May.
VYSHINSKY: So Tukhachevsky declared that he would start
a revolt in the early part of May?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, he did.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rosengoltz, continue.
ROSENGOLTZ: I now want to deal with the criminal utilization of the channels of the People's Commissariat of Foreign
Trade in my Trotskyite activities.
VYSHINSKY (to Rosengoltz): What have you to say about
your meetings with Gamarnik?
ROSENGOLTZ: I confirm the testimony I gave at the preliminary investigation.
VYSHINSKY: Which exactly?
ROSENGOLTZ: As regards Gamarnik, the chief point is that
Gamarnik told us of his proposal, which apparently had the consent of Tukhachevsky, that it was possible to seize the building
of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs during the military coup. Gamarnik assumed that this attack would be carried
out by some military unit under his direct command, believing
that he enjoyed sufficient Party, political prestige in the army.
He calculated that in this affair he would have the support of some
of the commanders, especially the dare-devils. I remember that
he mentioned the name of Gorbachev.
VYSHINSKY: And so in addition to your having been informed by Tukhachevsky of his plans for a criminal plot, you
were also informed of these plans by Gamarnlk?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did Krestinsky take part in these conversations
with Gamarnik and in the discussion of this plan?
ROSENGOLTZ: He was not present at this conversation.
VYSHINSKY: But he was on some other occasion?
ROSENGOLTZ: My conversations with Gamarnik were held
without Krestinsky.
VYSHINSKY: Krestinsky did not take part in them?
ROSENGOLTZ: No.
VYSHINSKY: And do you know whether Krestinskyhad similar
conversations with Gamarnik?
ROSENGOLTZ: I do not know of these conversations \vhich
Krestinsky had with Gamarnik.
VYSHINSKY: You do not know? (To Krestinsky.) Krestinsky,
what have you to say about this?
KRESTINSKY: I had one conversation with Gamarnik to-

256

gether with Arkady Pavlovich Rosengo1tz, where the question of
terrorism was discussed. When we saw that this business, with
which we had not been associated in Pyatakov's time, was left
unattended in our Trotskyite ranks after he was shot, and at
the same time it was clear and Trotsky had written that terrorist
acts were necessary, the three of us met to discuss what was to
be done. And at this meeting we unanimously came to the conclusion that of the three of us Rosengoltz and I were not suited
to take up this job, because by the nature of our work and our
contacts we were not connected with those groups of Party members and citizens who could undertake the task of preparing and
committing terrorist acts.
VYSHINSKY: In short, Gamarnik took it over?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. And after this neither of us, Rosengoltz
or myself, discussed with him concretely what he was doing,
but he used to tell us that he was making progress, that he was
selecting cadres, selecting groups.
ROSENGOLTZ: Concerning the utilization of our foreign
trade connections for criminal Trotskyite purposes, I might say
that Ivan Nikitich Smirnov utilized the channels of foreign trade
in his time. I knew that Golzman was active in the foreign
trade, then there was a man named Gerzberg who worked in
Berlin and had connections with Trotsky, then Birkenhof maintained connections with Trotsky and with Gaven. More recently
it was Krayevsky and Shostak. But the main connections were
maintained through the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs,
since Krestinsky had the mail service in his own hands.
VYSHINSKY: So diplomatic mail was used?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, we used the diplomatic mail and persons
who had diplomatic passports so that they could carry everything
they liked.
VYSHINSKY: Proceed.
ROSENGOLTZ: Foreign trade was criminally utilized by way
. of using and stealing funds to finance the Trotskyite movement.
Without dwelling on quite a number of perhaps insignificant
dealings, I shall mention two of the most important examples.
The first was an operation carried out by Krayevsky to the amount
of $300,000, which were transmitted to the Trotskyite organization or directly to Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: Put at Trotsky's disposal?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: By Krayevsky?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: On your instructions?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes. This was done through the corresponding
17

257

firms by using Sedov as a broker; later this financing Was
organized also by me personally, when I came to terms with
a certain official person in Moscow when we were concluding
an agreement.
VYSHINSKY: With what official person?
ROSEN GOLTZ: With the representative of a certain state.
VYSHINSKY: A foreign state?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes. Terms according to which Trotsky was
to receive approximately $110,000 annually in the course of
three years.
VYSHINSKY: So you arranged that Trotsky was regularly
and properly supplied with funds?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: These were the bigger operations; what about
the smaller ones? For example, did you transmit £2,000 to
Trotsky in 1933?
ROSENGOLTZ: That was done without me, but I knew of it,
of course; I am saying it not in order to absolve myself but for
the sake of exactitude.
VYSHINSKY: This was done through the channels of foreign
trade, and you were then ...
ROSEN GOLTZ: I was People's Commissar of Foreign Trade,
and with my sanction and knowledge ...
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, by you. So£ 2,000 were transmitted. This is also a large sum, but it is a trifle compared with
$110,000. And was there another £15,000 transmitted to Trotsky
in 1934?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, yes.
VYSHINSKY: £!5,000-that is not a mere trifle, it is
£15,000.
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, £15,000; then another time again
£10,000.
VYSHINSKY: £15,000, then £10,000, then £2,000, that already makes £27,000.
ROSENGOLTZ: And another 20,000 marks.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, a rather considerable amount
of money?
ROSENGOLTZ: Oh yes, I mentioned in the beginning only
two sums, the largest.
VYSHINSKY: I understand. Add to this another $300,000.
During what period?
ROSENGOLTZ: That was since 1933.
VYSHINSKY: And since 1931?
ROSENGOLTZ: Oh yes, $300,000 through Exportles.
VYSHINSKY: Through Exportles-that is a separate item.
What have you got to state further?
258

ROSENGOLTZ: Now I want to mention also that atattearlier
period-in 1923, in connection with a business contact I had ...
VYSHINSKY: With whom?
ROSENGOLTZ: With German military circles. Trotsky told
me to supply Seeckt with information about the Soviet air force.
VYSHINSKY: And did you supply it?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, I supplied this information.
VYSHINSKY: Besides transmitting money to Trotsky, you
als6 gave espionage information to Seeckt?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes; yes. This was in 1923.
VYSHINSKY: And later, and afterwards?
ROSENGOLTZ: Beginning with 1931, information was transmitted concerning orders to be placed abroad in the line of
foreign trade.
VYSHINSKY: Confidential, state information?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You have thus served a foreign intelligence
service during a long period of time?
ROSENGOLTZ: Information of this kind was given beginning
with 1931 up to 1935 and in 1936.
VYSHINSKY: And in 1937?
ROSENGOLTZ: None.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
ROSENGOLTZ: I am merely stating what the picture was.
VYSHINSKY: But why such a picture? Why did you not
transmit anything in 1937?
ROSENGOLTZ: We had no meetings.
VYSHINSKY: Because there was no suitable occasion?
ROSENGOLTZ: No, there was no occasion.
VYSHINSKY: And in 1923 you supplied General Seeckt
with espionage information on Trotsky's instructions?
.
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, yes.
VYSHINSKY: Do you know whether there was anybody
else who transmitted to Seeckt similar information at that time?
ROSENGOLTZ: I knew that Krestinsky had some kind of an
illegal connection with the Reichswehr.
VYSH INS KY: When did you know about it?
ROSENGOLTZ: Approximately during that same period and
somewhat later. I cannot say exactly; but I did not know what
was the nature of this connection.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps the accused Krestinsky will tell us
about the nature of this connection?
Accused Krestinsky, what was the connection with the Reichswehr to which Rosengoltz is referring?
KRESTINSKY: In 1921 Trotsky told me to take advantage
of a meeting with Seeckt during official negotiations to propose
17*

259

to him, to Seeckt, that he grant Trotsky a regular subsidy for
the development of illegal Trotskyite activities; at the same time
he told me that, if Seeckt will put up a counter-demand that we
render him services in the sphere of espionage, we should and
may accept it. I shall speak later about the conversation I had
with Trotsky when he gave me these instructions. I put the question before Seeckt and named the sum of 250,000 gold marks,
that is $60,000, a year. General Seeckt, after consulting his as.sistant, the chief of staff, agreed in principle and put up the counter-demand that certain confidential and important information
of a military nature should be transmitted to him, even if not
regularly, by Trotsky in Moscow or through me. In addition he
was to receive assistance in obtaining visas for some persons whom
they needed and whom they would send to the Soviet Union as
spies. This counter-demand of General Seeckt was accepted and
in 1923 this agreement had been put in effect.
VYSHINSKY: Did you transmit espionage information?
KRESTINSKY: I would say, not I, but we, the Russian
Trotskyites. But there were cases when I personally gave this
information to General Seeckt.
VYSHINSKY: You gave it personally?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. I also received money on several occasions.
VYSHINSKY: From whom did you receive money?
KRESTINSKY: From General Seeckt.
VYSHINSKY: Where?
KRESTINSKY: In his office. I handed over the money to
Trotsky personally during my visits to Moscow.
VYSHINSKY: Personally?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, without resorting to anybody's services.
VYSHINSKY: In what year did the negotiations with Seeckt
begin?
KRESTINSKY: It was in the spring and summer of 1922. In
the indictment it says 1921. This is of no great consequence, but
this first meeting of an official nature, which Trotsky suggested
that I take advantage of, occurred in the winter of 1921-22.
VYSHINSKY: So' this meeting was taken advantage of?
KRESTINSKY: On learning of these meetings, Trotsky suggested that I take advantage of the last one, which took place
at the end of the spring or in the summer of 1922. This is
of no consequence from the point of view of the charges
against me.
VYSHINSKY: So you established connectiQnS with the Reichswehr in the person of General Seeckt in the winter of 1921-22,
that is to say, since 1921?
,
KRESTINSKY: The connection of a criminal nature was
established in 1922.
260

VYSHINSKY: You first arranged the connection, and then?
KRESTINSKY: And then it developed into a criminal connection.
VYSHTNSKY: So it developed into a criminal connection?
KRESTTNSKY: Yes, since 1922, into a criminal connection.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated.
So you, Rosengoltz, established connections with the German
intelligence service already in 1923?
ROSENGOLTZ: With Seeckt directly.
VYSHINSKY: Do you draw a line between the two?
ROSENGOLTZ: I am saying it merely for the sake of exactitude.
VYSHINSKY: So since 1923 you, accused Rosengoltz, began
to supply espionage information to foreign states?
ROSENGOLTZ: That is right.
VYSHINSKY: Proceed.
ROSENGOLTZ: I must also state, although I said it in my
testimony during the preliminary investigation, that in 1926
I gave information to Farbman, an English journalist, who at
the same time was a Trotskyite. This was information concerning
the foreign policy of the U.S.S.R. After that, during 1932-35, I
gave information about orders placed abroad to the editor
of the "British-Russian Gazette," Talbot, who came to me on
his behalf.
Now as regards wrecking activities. I want to state that
in these wrecking activities our aim was to help mainly Germany,
and partly japan.
Of the most important acts of this wrecking, which clearly
constituted also treacherous activity, I shall mention the conclu ..
sion of the oil agreement with Germany, r shall mention the
fact that gold tailings were exported to Germany when it would
have been more rational to treat them in the Soviet Union.
Further, the export of zinc concentrates, the advance exports,
then the export of pig iron to japan at reduced prices and in large
quantities at a time when there was an acute shortage of pig iron
on the market, the delay in placing orders for tonnage, which
entailed extra expenditures, the inclusion of a number of
disadvantageous terms in contracts, for exampler the formulation
of the clause concerning force-majeure, also the delays in exports
tO Mongolia and to Western China.
It is necessary to note especially the wrecking activities
which followed from our aim of working for defeat-the delay
in the import of materials needed for defence.
VYSHINSKY: You will tell of this in greater detail at the
in camera session. I think that there is no need to dwell OR this
question at present.

261

ROSENGOLTZ: Well, this in fact covers all that is of importance.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you any more questions to the
accused, Comrade Procurator?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Be seated, please.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to interrogate Krestinsky.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Krestinsky, tell the Court briefly
of your counter-revolutionary activities without dwelling on those
points which have already been cleared up.
KRESTINSKY: I began my illegal Trotskyite activities at
the end of 1921, when on Trotsky's suggestion I consented to the
formation of an illegal Trotskyite organization and to my joining
its centre, which was to be made up of Trotsky, Pyatakov,
Serebryakov, Preobrazhensky and myself, Krestinsky. Trotsky
made this proposal to me immediately after the Tenth Congress.
At that time I rejected this proposal, because it seemed to me
that my differences with the Party were of a casual nature and
that, after my return from my summer vacation for cure, I would
be able to go on with my Party work without feeling restricted
in my rights, and that I had no grounds or motives for any· kind
of joint activities with Trotsky. But when it turned out during
my cure abroad that I was appointed to the Berlin post, and
when my request, which I made after my return, that this appointment be rescinded was rejected, Trotsky began to impress upon
me that this appointment was not dictated by business motives, that I was not fit for work abroad, that I did not know
the language, that I did not know foreign countries, and that this
step was taken in order to remove me from Party work forever.
As a result of this kind of systematic influence exerted on me,
which went on for several weeks, I consented to join this organization, which was clearly a violation both of the Party rules and
of the special decision of the Tenth Congress prohibiting the formation of groups. As yet, this was an offence of an inner Party
nature, which would not have entailed any serious consequences
for me if I had reported it to the Party leadership. A year later
I committed a crime-I refer to the one I spoke about during
the examination of the accused Rosengoltz-the agreement I
concluded. on Trotsky's instructions with General Seeckt, with
the Reichswehr in his person, about financing the Trotskyite
organization in exchange for services of an espionage nature which
we. undertook in this connection to render the Reichswehr. When
Trotsky gave me. these instructions my attitude towards them
was mainly of great apprehension, but apprehension not out of
fear, but, so to speak, out of some inner shuddering, and I pointed
out that this means espionage and treason to the fatherland. But

262

Trotsky argued that our line in foreign policy coincided with that
of Germany at that period, that Germany was in a state of ruin
after the war, and that in any event, in view of the existence
of revenge sentiments in Germany with regard to France, England and Poland, a clash between Germany and the Soviet Union,
or Soviet Russia at that time, in the near future was out
of the question, and that therefore we could agree to this deal
without actually committing a grave crime. Blinded by my factional bitterness, I permitted myself to be convinced by these
unsound, childish arguments. The agreement was concluded.
VYSHINSKY: These arguments were treasonable rather than
childish.
KRESTINSKY: Childish on account of their not being convincing, on account of their emptiness and on account of the ease
with which even a child could parry them.
VYSHINSKY: But you are not a child.
KRESTINSKY: That is why I say that, although these were
arguments which would not be convincing even for a youngster,
for a child, still I permitted myself to be convinced by these
arguments.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you permit yourself to be convinced?
KRESTINSKY: I have said already: blinded by my factional
bitterness, by my desire to fight the leadership.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps it was not particularly necessary to
try to convince you.
KRESTINSKY: I have said already that my first objections
I raised from tradition, from an inner impulse independent of
reason. It was a feeling of repulsion, unconscious, but I subjected it to reason . . . .
VYSHINSKY: To Trotskyite reason?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, to Trotskyite reason, which permitted
me to be persuaded by these Trotskyite treasonable arguments.
Since 1923 the agreement with Seeckt was carried out mainly
in Moscow, and sometimes in Berlin. But, of course, inasmuch
as I was the person who concluded this agreement, inasmuch as
I carried it out at times, and inasmuch as I was a member of
the organization on behalf of which this agreement was concluded,
I naturally bear full political responsibility also for those acts
which were committed in Moscow. This agreement did not remain
unchanged: in 1926 the Reichswenr raised the question of repudiating this agreement. I think that this was a tactical step with the
object of putting greater demands to us . . . .
VYSHINSKY: Who do you mean, "us"?
KRESTINSKY: The Trotskyites. At that time we had already
become accustomed to receiving sums regularly, in sound currency. . . .
263

VYSHINSKY: You had become accustomed to receiving
money from foreign intelligence services?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. This money went for the Trotskyite
work which was developing abroad in various countries, for
publishing literature and so forth . . . .
VYSHINSKY: What is the "and so forth"?
KRESTINSKY: For travelling expenses, for agitators, for
maintaining certain professional workers in various countries ....
VYSHINSKY: For the purpose of organizing espionage?
KRESTINSKY: I think that at that period, it is possible,
we did not need money for the organization of espionage.
VYSHlNSKY: Rosengoltz supplied espionage information in
1923. Why then was there no need of money?
KRESTINSKY: There was no need for him to spend money
in this connection.
VYSHINSKY: Not for him, but perhaps there was need for
somebody else. Is it not a fact that your Trotskyite organization
already engaged in espionage at that time?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, but the money which was received went
not for "production expenses," but for . . .
VYSHINSKY: You cannot vouch that the money was used for
that purpose, nor that it was not used.
KRESTINSKY: I cannot. Probably Trotsky obtained this
information free of charge from Trotskyites who occupied positions
in various institutions.
VYSH INS KY: If Rosengoltz and Krestinsky occupied positions
in one place, why could there not have been Rosengoltzes and Krestinskys occupying positions in other places who also needed
250,000 marks? In a word, may we say that the money went for all
kinds of Trotskyite criminal purposes?
KRESTINSKY: In 1926, when the struggle of the Trotskyite
groups abroad against the Party leadership was at its height, both
in Moscow and among the fraternal parties a refusal to accept this
money might have undermined the struggle of the Trotskyites.
Therefore when Seeckt gave warning that he intended to stop these
subsidies, I naturally raised the question as to the conditions on which
he would consent to extend the agreement. Then he advanced the
proposal that the espionage information which was being transmitted to him not regularly but from time to time should now assume
a more regular character, and, in addition, that the Trotskyite
organization should pledge that in case it assumed power during a
possible new world war, this Trotskyite government would take into
consideration the just demands of the German bourgeoisie, that is
to say, mainly demands for concessions and for the conclusi()n of
treaties of a different kind.
After I consulted Trotsky-I do not remember whether
264

it was in the beginning of the summer, when Trotsky was
taking medical treatment in Berlin, or later-and having received
his consent, I answered General Seeckt in the affirmative and our
information began to assume a more systematic character. no longer sporadic, as it had been before. Verbally, promises were made
with regard to a future post-war agreement.
VYSHINSKY: Thus, you kept on receiving money?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, we kept on receiving money.
VYSHINSKY: Will you tell us how much money you received
altogether?
KRESTINSKY: Beginning with 1923 until 1930 we received
annually 250,000 German marks in gold.
VYSHINSKY: This makes approximately two million gold
marks during these years?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, approximately two million gold marks.
VYSHINSKY: This is the sum of which you know?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, this is the sum of which I know.
VYSHINSKY: This agreement which was concluded in 1923
was in effect until 1930?
KRESTINSKY: Through me until 1930. Up to the end of 1927
the stipulations of this agreement were carried out mainly in Moscow. After that, from the end of 1927 almost to the end of 1928, in
the course of about 10 months there was an interruption in the receipt of money because after Trotskyism had been smashed I was
isolated, I did not know of Trotsky's plans, I received no information or instructions from him, and therefore I would not know what
to do with the money if I received it. On the other hand, the German side was not inclined to spur me on because they realized what
my position was at that time, they read in the papers of my renunciation, they took it for granted that I was probably being watched
and that in all probability I had no information which could be
of interest to them. This went on until October 1928, when I received a letter from Trotsky, who at that time was in exile in AlrnaAta, which was brought to me by Reich.
VYSHINSKY: Reich-Johannsen?
KRESTINSKY: No, that was an entirely different person.
Reich-Johannsen was Bessonov's man, with whom he maintained
connections.
This letter contained Trotsky's instructions that I was to receive from the Germans the money, which he proposed to hand over
either to Maslow or to Trotsky's French friends, that is Rosmer,
Madeleine Paz, and others.
I got in touch with General Seeckt. At that time he had resigned
and occupied no post whatever. But I had no contact with his successors, and did not address myself to them. I addressed myself to
Seeckt, told him that the connections in Moscow were cut off, that
265

I had definite instructions and asked him to assist me in this business. He volunteered to talk it over with Hammerstein and to
obtain the money. He obtained the money.
VYSHINSKY: And who is this Hammerstein?
KRESTINSKY: Hammerstein was at that time the chief of
staff of the Reichswehr, and in I 930 he became Commander in Chief
of the Reichswehr. Seeckt received this money and I visited him! do not remember whether it was at that time or later, but I visited him. During our meeting he, without referring to our obligation to supply espionage information, engaged me in a political
conversation on international questions with the idea of
obtaining some information from me. I do not remember what
exactly the conversation was about at that time, but during previous meetings with him I had given him information concerning
Dovgalevsky's negotiations with the French for an agreement which
was then being negotiated; I informed him of this before it was
made public. Then I informed him of Lyubimov's negotiations with Mussolini or with Mussolini's assistants concerning
a trade agreement, a credit deal; again I informed him of this before and more fully than it was later publicly announced.
I do not remember what we spoke about during this first visit.
I did give him some information of a confidential nature.
VYSHINSKY: Did he pay the money?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, he gave money.
VYSHINSKY: Did he know what he was giving it for?
KRESTINSKY: He knew, but I carried on the conversation
in such a way as not to talk especially on this subject.
VYSHINSKY: But did you talk of it previously, before that?
Did you settle the question of money with him beforehand?
KRESTINSKY: Of course.
Before I received the money, Maslow telephoned me and asked
me in cryptic language whether anybody had visited me and whether
I had anything to transmit to him. My attitude to Maslow was a
negative one, I considered him an unprincipled person. I disliked
him not because of any of his Trotskyite or treacherous tendencies,
but I considered him a person with no principles in these matters.
VYSHINSKY: Which matters?
KRESTINSKY: Trotskyite matters.
VYSH INS KY: And do you consider yourself a man of pri nci pies?
KRESTINSKY: Well, I was a Trotskyite, but he could be a
Trotskyite today, renounce Trotskyism tomorrow and then become
a Trotskyi te again. . . .
VYSHINSKY: Have you been a Trotskyite all the time?
_ KRESTINSKY: I did adhere more or less constantly to one
point of view. I had certain differences of opinion, there were vacillations. . . .

266

VYSHINSKY: But you have been a Trotskyite all the time?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. But while in the Trotskyite ranks I had
certain differences with Trotsky, certain vacillations, but I adhered
to this Trotskyite line all the time.
VYSHINSKY: Have you been a Trotskyite all the time?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. I told Maslow that I had no money for
him, but that I had some for Rosmer and Madeleine Paz. Ten days
later he telephoned and said that Madeleine Paz had arrived and
that she was stopping at the Hotel "Excelsior." I met her there
and I gave her the money. It continued this way until the autumn
of 1930. When I was leaving Germany I considered two possibilities:
the first possibility-to arrange the connection with Seeckt through
Sedov, whom I had met before my departure and established contact, or else to arrange the connection through Putna, who had been
appointed military attache in Berlin just before my departure, and
concerning whom I learnt from Smirnov that he was a Trotskyite,
and I thought that he was still a Trotskyite, but I had no opportunity to talk to him about the money from Seeckt being handed over
to him. I sent word to Sedov that he should try to come to Berlin
before I left and I told Seeckt that somebody would come to see
him on my behalf or on Trotsky's behalf. If Sedov or Putna should
come, he would not have to ask them for any written recommendation or identification and he could deal with them safely. If,
however, it should be somebody else, then he must have a letter
from Trotsky or a note from me. On that we agreed. Sedov had
not arrived prior to my departure, and I left without putting
anybody in touch with Seeckt; I let it take place after my
departure, when Sedov would turn up. I :1eft instructions with
Yakubovich, the second counsellor of the Embassy, who was my
assistant in the Trotskyite affairs, to the effect that he:was to
direct Sedov to Seeckt. Sedov did not get to Seeckt. In 1931, when
Pyatabv went to Berlin to complete the credit agreement and to
place orders, I. N. Smirnov also went with him. I told Pyatakov
then of the understanding that I had reached with Seeckt and suggested that he should find out whether Putna was a member of our
organization, and, if so, that he should make him take part in
this business. Pyatakov said that he would do this, and when he
returned he. said that things had been arranged and that Putna
had accepted and was maintaining this connection. Thus I had no
longer any connection with the money affairs. Putna took care of
these, and later Trotsky and Sedov directly, and later on this
developed into. a more comprehensive agreement. Now I shall
tell about my meetings . . . •
. VYSHINSKY: Inasmuch as you are winding up the story of
this period of your cnminal activities, I want to get more precise
information on one question. You said that in the winter of
267

1921-22 you evolved your calculations on the German Reichswehr.
KRESTINSKY: The plans to utilize the German Reichswehr
for criminal Trotskyite purposes appeared in the spring of 1922.
VYSHINSKY: Did your Trotskyite organization maintain
contact with Seeckt even before 1921?
KRESTINSKY: There was a contact with him of which I do not
want to speak at an open session. It was a contact established by a
member of our organization who at that time was not yet a member
of our organization, and it was not a contact of a Trotskyite nature.
VYSHINSKY: If you please, we shall not speak of everything
in open session. But something may be said right now. In the first
place, who was Kopp?
KRESTINSKY: Generally speaking, Kopp was an old Menshevik.
VYSHINSKY: What were his relations with Trotsky?
KRESTINSKY: He maintained good relations, both business
and personal, with Trotsky, even before the war and before the
revolution.
VYSHINSKY: And in Party relations?
KRESTINSKY: When I speak of business relations, I refer
to his Party affairs, which at that time were Menshevik.
VYSHINSKY: Hence he was connected with Trotsky in Menshevism and in Trotskyism.
KRESTINSKY: If we consider . . .
VYSHINSKY: We all know what we may consider.
KRESTINSKY: I simply do not know whether he was a Trotskyite of the pre-war formation.
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you about the formation, I am
asking you, who was Kopp? Was he at that time extremely close
to Trotsky?
.
KRESTINSKY: He was a man close to Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: As a Menshevik?
KRESTINSKY: As a Menshevik.
VYSHINSKY: As one who shared Trotskyite views?
KRESTINSKY: I think he was more of a Menshevik than a
Trotskyite.
VYSHINSKY: And I think that Trotsky was more of a Menshevik than a Trotskyite. Well, so there is nc contradiction between
what we say.
KRESTINSKY: There is no contradiction.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have a talk with Trotsky and Kopp
about .obtaining funds for secret Trotskyite work?
KRESTINSKY: This talk took place in the sprip.g of 1922.
VYSHINSKY: So Kopp did engage in Trotskyite secret work?
KRESTINSKY: Oh, yes.
VYSHINSKY: So we may say that Kopp was a Trotskyite?
268

KRESTINSKY: But not during the period to which you re•
ferred.
VYSHINSKY: But up to that period he was a Menshevik who
was connected with Trotsky. I see no difference here. This is a
matter for the Institute of Party History.
KRESTINSKY: No, but . . .
VYSHINSKY: You say that in July 1920 this same Kopp established contact with Seeckt in connection with a matter of which
you apparently do not intend to speak here but of which you will
tell us at the in camera session.
KRESTINSKY: It was Seeckt who got in touch with Kopp.
VYSHINSKY: Kopp was at that time the representative of
the Red Cross for the repatriation of the prisoners of war; what
business did he have with Seeckt?
KRESTINSKY: At that time he was actually our unofficial
representative in Berlin.
VYSHINSKY: Whether yours or not yours, that we shall clear
up later. But while he was the representative of the Red Cross
in 1920, Kopp had contact with General Seeckt. Is that true?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: From this I draw the conclusion that, not only
in 1921 and 1922, but as early as l 920, Trotsky sent out feelers
through Kopp and found his way to Seeckt.
KRESTINSKY: I do not know the details of this, there were
official meetings at that time.
VYSHINSKY: Is such a conclusion natural?
KRESTINSKY: I know of the other aspect of this matter, the
purely official aspect.
VYSHINSKY: You know of the purely official aspect, but is
the question of money an official aspect?
KRESTINSKY: Official.
VYSHINSKY: The question of money for Trotskyite purposes from the German Reichswehr-is that an official aspect
or not?
KRESTINSKY: This was the secret Trotskyite aspect, a crim·
inal thing.
VYSHINSKY: Which refers to 1921-22?
KRESTINSKY: To 1922.
VYSHINSKY: Did you say that in the winter of 1921 you already had meetings and conversations with Ge.neral Seeckt about
this?
KRESTINSKY: Not about this.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to read the following passage in
Vol. III, p. 13 reverse: "During these conversations the question
269

of fonds for secret ;frotskyite work Was raised . . . . ·This question
of financial means was raised by Trotsky . . . . "
. KRESTINSKY: That is right.
VYSHINSKY: " . . . who had met certain difficulties in utilizing office funds for secret Trotskyite purposes. Kopp then suggested that an attempt be made to obtain the necessary funds
from the German Reichswehr. The following circumstance favoured
this. As early as June 1920 . . . "etc.
"Thus contact between Kopp and General Seeckt had already
been established . . . . ''
This is what the accused Krestinsky testified on June 9, 1937.
Accused Krestinsky, do you confirm this?
KRESTINSKY: Oh, yes, fully, but a few lines before that it
says that this conversation between me, Trotsky and Kopp took
place at the time when I was here for the Eleventh Congress.
VYSHINSKY: But this was preceded by a conversation which
Kopp had with Seeckt in 1920, and which you are here trying to
represent as an official contact, but I think that that already was
the first step in your Trotskyite treasonable connections with General Seeckt, for which you took advantage of your official position.
Do you confirm this?
KRESTINSKY: Oh, yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any questions concerning this part of the testimony?
VYSHINSKY: No. Accused Krestinsky, proceed.
KRESTINSKY: In 1929, in the autumn, I think it was in
September, when I was on my vacation in Kissingen, in the
South of Germany, Yakubovich telephoned me from Berlin and informed me-it was done in cryptic language-that Trotsky's
son wanted to see me on his father's instructions. I suggested
that he come to Kissingen. On the following day, or the day
after, Sedov and Yakubovich arrived. They stopped in different
hotels. Sedov stopped in the hotel "Englische Hof," which was
'not frequented by Soviet citizens. We had our meeting in this
hotel.
Since Rosengoltz spoke of this in general outline, I shall tell
in greater detail about the information and the instructions which
I received. Sedov's information was to the effect that Trotsky
advised the exiled and expelled Trotskyites to hand in statements
declaring that they renounced the opposition struggle and asking
to be reinstated in the Party. He mentioned particularly that I
could speak frankly to Pyatakov and Radek, although Pyatakov
had handed in a statement on his renunciation of Trotskyism
in 1928 and Radek, I think, in 1929. And he pointed out that they
were still followers of Trotskyism.
He said further that it was necessary to give up work among
270

the masses. Up to that time, the Work of the TrotskyHes wa.~
orientated towards winning over the masses and coming, as
it were, to power in the Party and then in the Soviet
Union by means of wide mass work, of winning followers.
Now Trotsky thought that it was utopian in the first place,
and, finally, that it was impossible inasmuch as he proposed that we get back into the Party by deception and that
we continue our activities in secret. It was impossible simultaneously to carry on in secret and pose as honest people faithful
to the Party, and at the same time to carry on work among the
masses in order to draw them into the ranks of the Trotskyites.
It was necessary to try to preserve the skeleton organization; to see to
it that these people got into the Party and Soviet organizations
and tried to occupy there more or less independent responsible
posts, so as to proceed in strict secrecy with the work of drawing
into the organization new individual followers from among trustworthy people in order to increase and strengthen the backbone
of the cadre organization.
The question as to when and how these cadres would be used
for the purpose of assuming power in the Party and in the Soviet
state had not been raised at that time. When Rosengoltz spoke,
when he told about the meeting, he said that the substance
of the meeting was that he and I should occupy responsible posts
and work in strict secrecy. But it was not quite so. The instructions
were to the effect that we should worm our way into the Party,
to occupy responsible posts there, and it referred to all and not
only to us.
VYSHINSKY: I did not quite get you. You say that these
instructions referred not only to you?
KRESTINSKY: Not only to the two of us, but to all the
others.
VYSHINSKY: But to you also?
KRESTINSKY: I am speaking in wider terms. We were not
supposed to limit ourselves to going under cover and biding
our time. I was to keep up the connection with the Reichswehr,
getting money from them and transmitting information to them,
I was to organize the connections between Trotsky and his agents
in Europe and the Trotskyites in the Soviet Union. It is true
that, as far as Rosengoltz was concerned, he was not given a~y
concrete tasks in connection with any particular work of his,
except that he was to occupy some post. I was commissioned
to inform Pyatakov and Rosengoltz of this conversation. I infon:ned
Pyatakov of it that same year, towards the end of my vacation.
Rosengoltz I informed of it in the beginning of 1930; then, a year
later, early in October 1930, I went to Moscow for perman~nt
work in the capacity of Assistant People's Commissar of Foreign
271

Affairs. I have already told you what I did with regard to this
connection with the Reichswehr. In short, with Pyatakov's and
Smirnov's help it was handed over to Putna.
The connection with Trotsky was established in the following
way. Yakubovich stayed on in. Berlin for approximately a year
after my departure, and we agreed with him that, if necessary,
he would receive letters from me in the diplomatic mail to for·
ward to Trotsky, and that during his meetings with Sedov he
would arrange with him as to the addresses in Paris to which
these letters were to be forwarded.
In addition, since I had by that time established a connection
with another worker of the Embassy, Stern, who entertained
Trotskyite sympathies, I agreed with him that if Yakubovich
were to leave Berlin sooner than he, Stern, then my request to
Stern was that he should take over these my commissions and
instructions from Yakubovich, which was done because when
Yakubovich left in 1931, while Stern remained until 1932, Yakubovich handed over to Stern the Paris addresses and the information as to the connection with Trotsky through Paris; he informed
him of this in complete detail. Up to 1933 I was really not
supposed to do any other work in Moscow. I did not agree to
that, but when in the course of our work a need was felt to convey
information concerning events in the Soviet Union, information
which did not appear in the Soviet press and which did not get
abroad through foreign correspondents in the regular way, in. any
case when there was need for it, for our Trotskyite reasons and,
besides, Radek asked me for it, I arranged through certain members
of my staff in the Press Department of the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs that certain foreign correspondents should
be supplied with confidential information.
VYSHINSKY: Who exactly of the foreign correspondents?
KRESTINSKY: I do not mention their names because Mironov,
who was in charge of this business, did not give me their exact
names. I should not like to make guesses.
VYSHINSKY: In the indictment the name of Scheffer is mentioned.
KRESTINSKY: Scheffer-that is a different affair. Scheffer
left Germany after I had left and we did not have him in mind
in this case.
VYSHINSKY: And was he not being supplied through others?
KRESTINSKY: I cannot tell definitely. He left for America.
VYSHINSKY: But this is of no consequence.
KRESTINSKY: I cannot say definitely.
VYSH INS KY: Mention some of the foreign correspondents.
It would be interesting to know whom you supplied.
KRESTINSKY: We had in mind German correspondents.

272

VYSHINSKY: And their names?
KRESTINSKY: I do not want to mention their names. Some
-of them were mentioned to me, but they were not mentioned
·openly.
VYSHINSKY: The President warned us, both sides, that we
may not mention any surnames and names of official representatives of foreign states. Foreign correspondents do not belong to
this category.
KRESTINSKY: Of course. Inasmuch as Mironov did not
mention the names to me, but only spoke of them, I was just
.guessing.
VYSHINSKY: Do you know their names?
KRESTINSKY: I guess, I presume.
VYSHINSKY: What do you presume?
KRESTINSKY: I presume that it was Baum, I presume that
it was just, that it was Guenther Stein, and William Stein,
because Mironov was closely connected with them through his
work and personally.
VYSHINSKY: And were you connected with them?
KRESTINSKY: I was connected with them officially.
VYSHINSKY: But you arranged for this connection?
KRESTINSKY: I organized the matter of Mironov's supplying
information to foreign correspondents.
VYSHINSKY: Information which you were interested in
publishing for Trotskyite purposes?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You organized this business?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. I have already said that, of course,
1 bear full responsibility for this business. I am only mentioning
that I personally was not directly connected with them.
· VYSHINSKY: I am not speaking of direct connections. There
is a certain division of labour here: you were the organizer, he
was the executor, and they, were they your accomplices?
KRESTINSKY: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you enlisted the services of some foreign
correspondents in order to establish espionage conrn~ctions? Is
that right?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. Through Pyatakov and partly through
Radek I was kept somewhat informed of the general work and I
showed interest in the problems of the work. Up to 1929 the position was as follows: money was received, let us say, from the
Reichswehr; this money was spent for mass work ....
VYSHINSKY: What kind of mass work?
KRESTINSKY: Trotskyite work. Theoretically it might have
been presumed that through this mass work the Trotskyites would
come to power in the Party and in the state ....
18

273

VYSHINSKY: How do you mean "come to power'?
KRESTINSKY: During the period up to 1929 there were
prospects that the Trotskyites would come to power not through
a conspiracy, not through insurrections, but through obtaining
influence among the masses, by making use of money obtained
abroad. This was the conception up to 1929. But after 1929, when
we had given up mass work, this conception was no more valid,
and no new conception had been reasoned out to the end, no new
conception had been advanced. There was money, there were
cadres, these cadres were being preserved and enlarged little by
little, but how these cadres and their leader Trotsky would come
to power-that question remained unsolved. Early in 1933 instructions were received through Ivan Nikitich Smirnov and
through Radek about terrorism, about wrecking activities. But
terrorism and wrecking activities are auxiliary methods, but not
methods of seizing power; terrorism is ...
VYSHINSKY: We know what terrorism is...•
KRESTINS'KY: I want to say what its political importance
is....
VYSHINSKY: We know that.
KRESTINSKY: By means of terrorism one person or another
may be killed, it may be possible to disorganize the government
to a certain extent, but you cannot seize power by this means.
VYSHINSKY: And how can it be seized?
KRESTINSKY: This was the question which confronted us.
and in our brief conversations with Pyatakov we were thinking,
we were saying that without help from the outside, that is to
say, without intervention, without armed assistance from outside, we could not manage, and when I went abroad ...
VYSHINSKY: Without armed assistance? Whose?
KRESTINSKY: Of the foreign bourgeoisie, of the bourgeois
states. And so, when I went abroad in 1933 I had in mind that
I would clear up the prospects in my conversation with Trotsky
and that we would map out a course, because, as it was, our work
was futile and offered no prospects. When I met Trotsky in
Meran ...
VYSHINSKY: Tell us how your meeting with Trotsky in
Meran was arranged.
KRESTINSKY: I stopped in Berlin for a few days on my way.
In Berlin the counsellor of our Embassy was Bessonov, our man,
a Trotskyite who was supposed to have connections with Trotsky
because when he left for Berlin in May 1933 I told him to establish
such connections.
VYSHINSKY: You instructed him?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I instructed him to establish this connection. It happened that Yakubovich and Stern had left Germany
274

and my connection was cut off. Pyatakov had a connection through
his people, who were going to Germany to place orders, but this
was not a regular connection and therefore it was necessary to establish a connection through the Embassy in Berlin so that we might
take advantage of the diplomatic mail. And this was entrusted to
Bessonov. I told him that it was necessary to inform Trotsky that
I wanted to see him.
VYSHTNSKY: So Bessonov told us here the real truth?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And at first you tried to deny it?
KRESTINSKY: But this was at first, and r told you what considerations prompted me to deny it.
VYSHINSKY: I am not accusing you, I only want to establish
the fact.
KRESTINSKY: On the first day, when I denied my guilt, since
I could not bring myself to admit it publicly, r naturally, as a
logical conclusion from this, denied also what Rosengoltz and
Bessonov said.
VYSHINSKY: But you must agree that by this you put Bessonov in the position of a liar.
KRESTINSKY: Well, what of it? I lied myself. Since I put
myself in the position of a liar, it was so much easier to put others
in the same position.
VYSHTNSKY: That is your logic.
KRESTINSKY: When I told him that I wanted to meet Trotsky
he said that there was a possibility of arranging it. At the same
time I said that I would stay in Kissingen to the end of September
and that I would spend the rest of the time up to the 10th of October in Meran, and I gave him the address of the Kissingen sanatorium in which I always stopped, and also my address in Meran.
r had stopped there twice in the same hotel and I thought that
this hotel still existed. I told him that it would be easy to find
me at this address (I was going under my own name).
I was still in Kissingen when Bessonov telephoned and told
me that the meeting would take place in Meran; in the meantime
I had received confirmation that the hotel, in which I had stopped
eight years before that, still existed; that was the hotel "Bavaria.'· Trotsky arrived in Meran around the 10th of October together
with Sedov. Reich, as Bessonov said, had not come with him, at
least J did not hear about it, I saw only the father and the son.
VYSHINSKY: And the holy ghost?
KRESTINSKY: No, the holy ghost . . .
VYSHINSKY: Was hovering over you?
KRESTI NSKY: Or else he remained in Paris, if we might consider this Reich the holy ghost.
18*

275

Trotsky, as he told me, arrived with somebody else's French
passport and he travelled by the route of which Bessonov spoke,
that is to say, over the Franco-Italian border, and not through
Switzerland and Germany. For Trotsky, the questions which
bothered us in Moscow were irrevocably settled and he himself proceeded to expound his instructions with regard to this. He said
that as since 1929 we had developed into an organization of a conspiratorial type, it was natural that the seizure of power could be
consummated only by force. But our conspiratorial organization
was unable to carry out any coup by itself. It was necessary to come
to an explicit agreement on this score with some bourgeois state. He
remarked that the embryo of such an agreement was our agreement
with the Reichswehr, but this agreement in no way satisfied either
the Trotskyites or the German side for two reasons: first, the other
party to this agreement was only the Reichswehr, and not the German government as a whole. If under the previous governments, the
Reichswehr had played a decisive role and we could reckon with it
as with the government as a whole, now, with Hitler's coming to
power and with Hitler's striving to subordinate the Reichswehr to
himself, and with a certain wariness in the attitude of some of the
leaders of the Reichswehr towards Hitler's attempts to penetrate
into the Reichswehr, the German government could no longer be
identified with the Reichswehr, and it was necessary to see to it
that not only the Reichswehr, but the German government as a
whole, became the other party to our agreement. This is first.
Second. What was the substance of our agreement with the
Reichswehr? We were receiving a small sum of money cmd they were
receiving espionage information which they would need during an
armed attack. But the German government, Hitler particularly,
wanted colonies, territory, and not only espionage information.
And he was prepared to be satisfied with Soviet territory instead
of the colonies for which he would have to fight England, America
and France. As for us, we do not need the 250,000 gold marks, we
need the German armed forces in order to come to power with their
assistance. And it is towards this end that the work should be carried on. This work means a treasonable agreement with a foreign
government about using foreign armed forces in order to achieve
victory over the Red Army and in order to open the road to power
for the Trotskyites. But even if the Soviet Union is attacked, let us
say, by Germany, that does not as yet make it possible to seize the
machinery of power unless certain internal forces have been prepared along these lines. But the Trotskyites as such are not suffidently numerous and strong to create such an organization by themselves. It is necessary to have strongholds both in the towns and in
the countryside among the petty bourgeoisie and the kulaks, and
there it is mainly the Rights who have the connections. Finally,
276

it is necessary to have a stronghold, an organization in the Red
Army, among the commanders, in order, with our united effort,
to seize the most vital places at the necessary moment and to
come to power, to replace the present government, which must be
arrested, by a government of our own which has been prepared
beforehand .
. From this it followed: the first line to take was for an agreement with foreign governments, the second for combining the
forces of the Trotskyites, the Rights and the military conspirators
within the Soviet Union.
In speaking about the Rights, about the necessity of establishing organizational connections with them, Trotsky said that we
should not confine ourselves to Rykov, Bukharin and Tomsky,
because although they were the recognized leaders of the Rights,
they had already been compromised to a great extent and were
under surveillance, and that it was necessary to make the connection through Rudzutak, who for many years had occupied a post
in the Soviet government with Rykov in the capacity of his
assistant and nobody had ever known of any differences between
him and the Party; therefore it was necessary to take him into
consideration and establish connections with him.
As for the military men, Trotsky, in speaking of them, mentioned only one name, that of Tukhachevsky, as a man of a Bonapartist type, an adventurer, an ambitious man who strove not
only for a military but also for a military-political role and who
would unquestionably make common cause with us.
Further Trotsky developed the idea of the necessity of terrorism, wrecking activities and diversions. In speaking of them,
Trotsky considered diversionist acts and acts of terrorism from
the point of view both of applying them in time of war for the
purpose of disorganizing the defensive capacity of the Red Army,
for disorganizing the government by· the moment of the coup
d'etat, and at the same time, these div.ersionist and terrorist acts
would make his, Trotsky's, position stronger and would give him
more confidence in his negotiations with foreign governments,
because he would be able to refer to the fact that his followers
in the Soviet Union were both sufficiently strong and sufficiently
active.
He undertook to carry on the negotiations with the Germans.
As for the Japanese, of whom he spoke as a force with which it
was also necessary to come to terms, he said that, for the time
being, it was difficult for him to establish direct connect~ons
with them, that it would be necessary to carry on conversations
with them in Moscow, that it was necessary in this connection
to use Sokolnikov, who was working in the People's Commis-

277

sariat of Foreign Affairs and, as it happened, was in charge of
eastern affairs. And inasmuch as this conversation would be held
only with an official person, and the preliminary conversation
would only be in the nature of soundings, it would be sufficient
to confine ourselves at first to general statements to the effect
that if a government of a bloc of the opposition groups assumed
power in the Soviet Union, it would display a favourable attitude
towards the Japanese and take into consideration the wishes
of the Japanese during the discussion and settlement of the
controversies existing between the Soviet government and the
Japanese government. He asked me to get in touch with Pyatakov
with regard to all these policies and particularly with regard
to the necessity of getting in touch with the Japanese. In
addition he said that I should not be content with the talks
which Pyatakov would have with Tukhachevsky and Rudzutak,
but that I should also see them, because I would be in a position
to tell them of my personal talk with Trotsky, of my personal
impressions, and that would exert a somewhat greater influence
in that direction.
VYSHINSKY: I beg your pardon, are you with this winding
up your explanations concerning your meeting with Trotsky
in Meran?
KRESTINSKY: With this I am winding up the story of my
meeting with Trotsky in Meran. During the meeting in Meran
he drew my attention to the necessity of using several people.
He spoke to me of Rosengo ltz.
VYSHINSKY: I am only interested in Rosengoltz, who is
one of the accused in the present case. What did he tell you
about Rosengoltz?
KRESTINSKY: The first to speak to me about Rosengoltz
was Sedov, as early as 1925; he asked me to convey the gist of
our conversation to Rosengoltz. And in 1933 Trotsky spoke to
me, saying that Rosengoltz had so far remained inactive; but
Rosengoltz, he said, is, generally speaking, a very active
man, persistent, tenacious, a man with wide connections
both through his military work and through his Party work,
through his work at the front, with varied circles of former Trotskyites and generally with wide circles; i.hat in this respect, in the
sense of his knowing people, he is second only to Serebryakov. But
Serebryakov was now removed from affairs and had no connections, while Rosengoltz was a man who had connections with
people, an influential man, and it was necessary to spur on his
activity in connection with this question and to draw him into
the work. He also spoke of the necessity for Rosengoltz to
develop wrecking activities in his department.

278

VYSHINSKY: Did you convey this to Rosengoltz?
KRESTINSKY: r conveyed it to Rosengoltz.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for 30 minutes.

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
;please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Krestinsky, please continue, only make it shorter,
·do not dwell on the circumstances with regard to which you
have already made replies.
KRESTINSKY: But I must explain the consequences of my
.actions after my return from abroad. When I returned I immediately informed Pyatakov and Rosengoltz of my talk. Pyatakov
talked it over with Tukhachevsky and Rudzutak. Perhaps he
spoke to other Rights, perhaps also to Gamarnik, but I don't
;know. He informed me that he had spoken to Tukhachevsky and
Rudzutak.
In February 1934, I met both Tukhachevsky and Rudzutak,
told them the substance of my conversation, and got from both
.of them a confirmation in principle, their acceptance of the line
for an understanding with foreign states for their military
assistance, for a defeatist policy, for setting up a united organization within the country; they even told me that for them it was
not a question of principle but a question of the necessity of
.ascertaining what their forces were, and that they would then give
.a final reply to Pyatakov as the chief representative of the Trotskyite organization in the U.S.S. R.
Even before I received information from Pyatakov to the
·effect that things had been set in motion and that an understanding
·had been concluded, I had also begun to select forces in my organi.zation, in the Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, and to select those
on whom I could rely in case of a counter-revolutionary coup,
.although it was clear to me that a coup was not a matter of the
FJ.ear future, nor even of the nearest one or two years, since this
matter was being linked up with the beginning of a war with Germany and, presumably, at the same time with Japan, because
•Germany would not attack without Japan, they would attack
together.
In the beginning of 1935 Pyatakov informed me that an understanding had been reached, named the composition of the centre
.of which I spoke yesterday, and tol'd me that myself and Rosengoltz,
while not joining tbe centre, would work under its direction,
mainly in connection with the planning and preparing of the
;future government machinery. Here was a division of labour. We
279

were told that we would be connected in this work with
Rudzutak from the Rights, and with Tukhachevsky. My impression
was that only Rudzutak was mentioned. But Rosengoltz took
an active part in this and he subsequently spoke to me of his
meetings with Rykov. In general, it was Rykov and Rudzutak
from the Rights, and Tukhachevsky from the military group.
There was no such thing as my knowing of the connections with·
Tukhachevsky and Rosengoltz's not knowing of them; but, as part
of the division of labour, he took upon himself mainly the connections with the Rights, although I was the one who used to see Rudzutak, and, as far as Tukhachevsky was concerned, it was mainly
I, but he also. He spoke of a meeting in I 937; I also had the impression, and I spoke of it at the investigation, that during one of the
first meetings at Rudzutak's country house, he was not there;
I am saying what I heard from Rosengoltz.
But, inasmuch as later, during the confrontation and here,
Rosengoltz said that he met Tukhachevsky and spoke to him for
the first time in 1937, and I told what I heard from Rosengoltz,
so evidently that is the way it happened.
And now with regard to setting the date for taking action.
From the very moment of my meeting in Meran it was considered
definitely established that our action was to be timed with the
outbreak of war, and that therefore we, here, in the Union, could
not independently set the date for Tukhachevsky's action, and we
did not do it. This question was outside Rosengoltz's and my competence; we were connected wi.th Tukhachevsky, Rudzutak and
Rykov, but conversations with regard to questions of high politics
or the date when action was to be taken were carried on by
Pyatakov.
Therefore, up to the autumn of 1936, up to Pyatakov's arrest,
I had no occasion to speak on these subjects either to Tukhachevsky
or to Rosengoltz, inasmuch as this question was outside the sphere
of our discussions. We were waiting for the war to begin, we were
waiting for the attack.
After Pyatakov and Radek had been arrested, when Bessonovwas going to Berlin, I took advantage of this and sent verbal
information to Trotsky to the effect that after I had taken up this
question with Rosengoltz and Rudzutak I could formulate the situation as follows: we think that quite a large number of Trotskyites
have been arrested, but nevertheless the main forces of this antiSoviet bloc-the Trotskyites, the Rights and the military conspirators-are as yet not affected, have not been smashed, that
action could be taken, and that for this purpose it is essential for
the centre that foreign action should be hastened. This was in.
October 1936. But late in November 1936 Tukhachevsky spoke
to me excitedly and in grave terms at the Extraordinary Eighth

Q80

. Congress of Soviets. He said arrests had begun and there was nC>
reason to think that things would stop with the arrests which had
already been made. Apparently the smashing up of the Trotskyites
and the Rights would go on. The fact that Yagoda was removed
from the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs indicated that
it was not only a question of dissatisfaction with his insufficiently
active work in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs.
Apparently, this indicated political mistrust of him, Yagoda,
not just as Yagoda, the former People's Commissar of Internal
Affairs, but as an active Rightist, as a member of the united
centre, and it was possible that they would unearth these
things. And if they unearthed this they would also unearth the
facts about the military group, and then we would have to give
up all hopes for a coup. He drew the conclusion: there was no use
waiting for intervention. It was necessary to act on our own. To.
begin on our own-that was difficult, that was dangerous; but
on the other hand there were chances that it might succeed. The
military organization, he said, is a big one and well-prepared and
he said he thought it necessary to take action. And it was with
regard to this that we were to request an answer.
And so he asked me to give him an answer on behalf of our
organization, and, if it was possible for me, to convey it to the
Rights, so that it would not be necessary for him to get in touch
with the Rights in this connection. I then spoke on this subject
to Rosengoltz. I think I did not speak at that time to Gamarnik.
Tukhachevsky spoke not only for himself, but also on behalf of
the counter-revolutionary organization of the military men, and
Gamarnik was a member of the military organization and a member
of the common centre, in which he represented the military group.
I talked it over with Rosengoltz, then I talked it over with Rudzutak, and we came to the conclusion that Tukhachevsky was right,
that time was pressing. We decided to ask for Trotsky's opinion.
As a rule I did not write to him about such questions, I preferred
to convey the information verbally. I sent a letter to Trotsky with
the diplomatic mail through Bessonov.
The letter dealt with the necessity of changing' the line according to which our in~ernal coup was necessarily to be connected
with a war. I said that the coup must be hastened. Without
consulting Tukhachevsky and the rest, I put to Trotsky in this
letter certain other questions in case he replied in the affirmative. It was clear to me that in the case of a coup of this kind
we would have to conceal the true purposes of the coup, we
would have to make a statement to the population, to the
army and to the foreign states; and so I put the question
this way: firstly, it would be the proper thing in our statements to the population not to mention that our coup was
281

<lesigned for the overthrow of the existing, Socialist, order. We,
were prepared to restore capitalist relations in the U.S.S.R. and
to make territorial concessions to the bourgeois states with which
we had already come to an agreement.
We dared not declare this openly to the Soviet people. I put
'before Trotsky the question that we should issue suitable statements to the population and the army, in which we would evade
.all questions connected with the true purposes of our coup, that
is, we would deceive the people and pose in the guise of. Soviet
.rebels: we would overthrow a bad Soviet government and re-establish
.a good Soviet government, which is the same as ...
VYSHINSKY: That was your line of reasoning?
KRESTINSKY: That is how we were going to speak to the
~population, that is what we were going to say; but privately we
-reasoned otherwise. Then it was decided that also in the statements to the foreign states we would not say that we were changing
the whole foundation of the state and that we agreed to certain
territorial concessions; in our statement to the population and
the army and in our statements to the foreign states we would
·say that, while we pursued a policy of peace, were reducing armaments, etc., we would nevertheless take action in defence of the
"frontiers of the Soviet Union and would not allow forcible severance
.of any parts from the Soviet Unior.
In my letter I asked Trotsky's opinion on the question of the
dissolution of the state farms and collective farms. It seemed to
me that economically, from the point of view of the productivity
·of labour, the collective form had justified itself in the eyes of
the collective farm peasants; I thought it would be better for
the time being to preserve this form while somewhat changing the
relations inside the collective farms so as to provide an opportunity
for an upper stratum to evolve. That is why I considered that in any
·case we should not be too outspoken on this question.
Bessonov conveyed this letter to Trotsky, who at that time
was still in Norway. My impression then was that Bessonov did
it by sending for Sedov, but as it turns out he sent the letter through
Reich-johannson, ana a reply was received to this letter. Trotsky
·
replied that he agreed.
VYSHINSKY: When did you get the reply?
KRESTINSKY: This reply in all probability came at the
·end of December or the beginning of January. It is difficult for
me to tell you the exact date now. Our conversations were held
at the congress in November, I sent the letter in the beginning
<0f December, the reply apparently came at the end of December,
o0r perhaps in the beginning of January....
VYSHINSKY: Or perhaps in the middle of December?
282

KRESTINSKY: No, it could not have been in the middle
()f December because of the time that had to elapse while the letter
went to Norway and a reply was received. . . . It transpired that
Trotsky on his own initiative raised the question of hastening
the coup and sent these instructions in a different, roundabout
way in a letter addressed to Rosengoltz. Rosengoltz received this
leEer approximately at the same time or somewhat later (I think
:through Shostak). And so, after this reply was received, we began
to make more direct preparations for the coup; Tukhachevsky was
given a free hand, he was given carte blanche to get on with the
job directly. It was about the beginning of February that
Rosengoltz and myself were officially made members of the centre.
In November Rosengoltz, Gamarnik and myself had to take over
the leadership of the Trotskyite organization. Pyatakov was out
.of it, Radek also. We had to conduct conversations with Tukha(:hevsky and Rudzutak without reporting to anyone on the Trotskyite side, because there were no people over us to give us instructions and lead us; we had to correspond directly with Trotsky, and
not through Pyatakov, as had been the case previously, when
Pyatakov was alive. This being so, we told Rudzutak that from
now on he should reckon with us as the main representatives of
the Trotskyites and count us in this centre, which existed although
it did not meet in full force. At the time, in Februarv, Tukha.chevsky was absent-on vacation in Sochi. When leaving on
vacation, he gave his confederates and assistants among the military instructions to get ready. Then we had a conference in Rosengoltz's apartment, about which Rosengoltz has told you. I shall
not repeat the gist of the conference because Rosengoltz has given
it you in fair detail. At this conference the date of the coup was
fixed-the second half of May. But at the very beginning of
May it transpired that Tukhachevsky was not going to London.
By this time Rudzutak had returned from Central Asia. After
Rudzutak's return and when it became known that Tukhachevsky
was not going to London, he declared that he could accomplish
this coup in the first half of May. Ever since 1935 I had been in
contact with three responsible officials of the Moscow Party organization who were covert Trotskyites-Postolovsky, Furer and
Korytny, who were busy getting covert Trotskyites into responsible
fobs in the Moscow region and city organizations, were maintaining
contact with the Party for Moscow-and they knew from. me
that the time might come when a certain number of promotions
would be needed for the central apparatus also.
I got in touch with them and told them that the time for action
was drawing nearer, and therefore they must dra:V up lists· of
people in Moscow to be arrested and removed from their posts ~t the
outbreak of the coup, and lists of people who could be appointed

283

to these vacancies. As at the time a whole series of local district
conferences was taking place in Moscow and various changes in personnel were being made, it was settled that I would have the lists.
approximately by May 12. But early in May the debacle of the
counter-revolutionary organization began, changes on the active
list of the military department were published, Gamarnik was.
removed from his post of First Assistant People >s Commissar and
Tukhachevsky from his post of Second Assistant People>s Commissar, Tukhachevsky was transferred to Samara, Yakir from Kiev,
Uborevich from Byelorussia, while Kork and Eidemann were
arrested. It became clear that a coup was now impossible, so
that the question whether the coup should take place in the
middle of May became obviously irrelevant.
I began to get ready for my arrest. I talked matters over with
Rosengoltz. Rosengoltz did not expect to come to grief, and undertook
to continue connections with Trotsky. I also warned the Moscow
men that in case I was arrested they must get in touch with Rosengoltz. A few days later I was arrested.
I want to supplement my testimony somewhat. I have not
spoken of my connections with Trotsky after I returned from
abroad. These connections were maintained through Berlin and
BesSDnov, and only after Trotsky removed to Oslo, through our
Minister in Oslo, Yakubovich, whose name I mentioned as the
go-between in my meeting with Sedov in 1929.
In the autumn of 1935 Trotsky, through Yakubovich, reproached
us all for insufficient activity. He did not mean activity in the
sense of accelerating the coup, because this was bound up with
external circumstances and outbreak of war, but in the sense of
developing terrorist and diversive activities. This I conveyed to.
all the leading comrades.
Then Pyatakov went abroad, and a large number of letters.
passed through Bessonov. There were quite a few letters from
Pyatakov, which for the most part were conveyed through Bessonov, sometimes through Yakubovich, and when Yakubovich left
in the winter of 1935 our situation was reported through
him. Through Bessonov in 1934 I communicated the results of my
conversations with Rosengoltz, Rudzutak and TukhachevskyThrough Bessonov I communicated that a committee had been·
formed in 1935, although in all probability Pyatakov had spoken:
of this before me, but I also considered it my duty to make it
known.
The question of terrorist activity. Rosengoltz was telling the
truth when he said here that this business wa~ centralized, that
Smirnov was attending to it. Soon he was arrested and Mrachkovsky
took over the job. Then these questions were taken over by Pyata284

kov, but when Pyat2kov was dead and this business was left without
.anybody in charge, Oamarnik undertook it.
During a meeting with Tukhachevsky the latter insisted that
certain terrorist acts were to be committed before the counterrevolutionary coup. Rosengoltz and I were doubtful about this,
not from the point of view of principle, but from the point of
view of political expediency.
We were of the opinion that these terrorist acts preceding
the coup might create a less favourable situation for the coup,
they would put the government, the masses of the workers, and
the Red Army on their guard; furthermore, as a result of this
-0r that terrorist act, radical reprisals might follow against many
.of the arrested, and we were calculating on them as our cadres.
If during the coup the premises of the People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs and the prisons should be seized, we anticipated
getting back a number of important people, notably Pyatakov,
who would be assigned responsible work. Since Tukhachevsky
insisted on terrorist acts, primarily against Molotov and VoroshiIov, we gave our consent, and told him that terrorists for these
.acts would be provided. Gamarnik, who on this question was
.acting in a dual position-on behalf of the military organization
.and of our organization-told us that he also had some picked
men for terrorist acts.
That, I think, is all I can say about my activity and the activity
of the people associated with me in terrorist, underground, conspiratorial and treasonable work.
VYSHINSKY: After all your vacillations and contradictory
statements here in Court, do you now plead guilty to the charges
brought against you?
KRESTINSKY: I do.
VYSHINSKY: You admit that throughout our revolution you
have been one of the most active and direct participants of the
Trotskyite organization.?
KRESTINSKY: Not throughout the revolution, but from 1921.
~ VYSHINSKY: You admit that ever since 1921 you have been
supplying regular spy information to the German intelligence
service?
KRESTINSKY: Actually ever since 1923, although an understanding was reached in 1922.
VYSHINSKY: That is the argument we had about dates.
KRESTINSKY: It is not an argument about dates; at the
-session in camera I will go into greater detail about it.
VYSHINSKY: Well, all right. In any case, you admit today
that you are a German spy of long standing, which you reckon
.at least from 1923, while we reckon from 1921.

285

KRESTINSKY: Actuallyfrom 1923, although an understanding
was reached in 1922. I consider that the crime had already been
perpetrated when I came to an agreement with the Trotskyite
organization to that effect.
VYSHINSKY: Do you plead guilty to being an active member of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I was an active member of the conspiratorial "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
VYSHINSKY: From the moment when the bloc was
formed?
KRESTINSKY. It was formed somewhat earlier; I joined
it somewhat later, but I was ready to join this bloc ever since my
meeting with Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: But before you joined this bloc your activities could hardly be distinguished from the activities of the bloc.
Your organization more and more approached the main tasks
which were afterwards embodied in the program of the bloc?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, yes. I have been a member of this orgapization from the beginning of 1935.
VYSHINSKY: Further, you are not only a member, but one
of the organizers of the conspiracy against the Soviet power?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You admit it?
KRESTINSKY: Yes. Up to 1937 I was not a member of the
central group, but one of the participants.
VYSHINSKY: But you were a member of the group attached
to the centre?
KRESTINSKY: Yes, I was a member of the group attached.
to the centre.
VYSHINSKY: Further you.made direct preparations and took
part in drawing up a plan for an anti-Soviet coup d'etat in the
U.S.S.R.?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: By means of an armed insurrection reinforced
with terrorist acts ...
KRESTJNSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Calculating on the U.S.S.R. being involved
in a war and defeated?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: With all the political consequences which
might ensue from this fact?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
VYSH INS KY: To this too you plead wholly and entirely
guilty?
KRESTINSKY: Yes.
286

VYSHINSKY: And, finally, you took a hand in discussing
and preparing terrorist acts against Comrade Stalin, Comrade·
Molotov, and Comrade Kaganov~ch?
KRESTINSKY: I admit it.
VYSHINSKY: Do you know whether besides Gamarnik your
accomplice Rosengoltz also undertook a special task to commit
a terrorist act? ...
KRESTINSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Besides Gamarnik, who undertook the task
of organizing this act?
'
KRESTINSKY: I had not heard about it frcm him.
VYSHINSKY: Didn't he inform you about this?
KRESTINSKY: No.
VYSH INSKY (to the President): May I ask the accused<
Rosengoltz?
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rosengoltz, did you personally have
the crimi.nal intent to commit a terrorist act against any of the
leaders of the Soviet government?
. ROSENGOLTZ: Yes, I testified to this and I confirm it.
VYSHINSKY: You personally intended to commit a terrorist
act?
ROSENGOLTZ: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you will say against whom?
ROSENGOLTZ: As I testified at the preliminary investigation, against Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions to Krestinsky.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rakovsky, do you confirm the
testimony you gave at the preliminary investigation?
RAKOVSKY: I confirm it entirely.
THE PRESIDENT (to Vyshinsky): Have you any questions?
VYSHINSKY: Yes. Accused Rakovsky, tell us briefly to what
you plead guilty in the present case.
RAKOVSKY: Allow me to make a preliminary remark.
VYSHINSKY: If it is not very long.
RAKOVSKY: It is very short.
VYSHINSKY: By all means.
RAKOVSKY: From the trials which have taken place and
the trial which is being heard here the third day, the conclusion
might be drawn, I think, that I was somewhat on the fringe of
things, because no one would suppose, of course, that my name
would be hushed up. But I say this not to absolve myself of any
responsibility whatsoever Not at all. I just want to say that along
with these organizations, there is standing before you a man guilty of high treason, who was connected with them by certain
threads-some horizontal, and some vertical, and they all led tc>

287

Trotsky. This, so to speak, is the guiding force in all these
conspiracies, in all these treacheries and treasons against the Soviet Union, against the leaders of the government and the Party.
Such is my preliminary remark.
My treasonable activities are divided into two periods. Between these two periods lies my exile. Only this factor prevented
me from deeper complicity in all these centres which were formed
here. In so far as my treasonable activities bear a more systematic
·charact~r after my exile, I intend to begin with the second period
and then return to the first period.
Having received permission to go for treatment to Lake Shirlo
in 1932, I met Nikolai Ivanovich Muralov in the summer in Novosibirsk, where I was stopping over on my way. And it was
there, !n July, or the beginning of August, that I held a conver·sation with him. He told me that he had highly important news,
.and then he told me that instructions had been received from
Trotsky to change over to new, terrorist methods of struggle.
When I asked him to explain what they consisted, of, he said:
terrorist methods of struggle. Trotsky pointed out that after the
defeat of the opposition, after the rebuff which it had received
from the Party and the working class, what with the dissension
arid demoralization which ensued in its own ranks, the old meth-0ds of struggle would not lead to seizure of power. I must tell
you, not with the intention of creating for myself any circumstan·ces mitigating my offence, but because it corresponds to the truth,
that Muralov's information dumbfounded me and at the same time
evoked a strong reaction. I was in exile, isolated, occupying
myself with all kinds of theoretical calculations, and what was
taking place in Moscow, where the leaders of the Trotskyite underground opposition were living in a dense atmosphere of sectar:ianism, nursihg their usual rancour there-between this atmosphere
.and mine, of course, there certainly was a difference. In Moscow this
·evolution of Trotskyism, which is natural, progressed at a rapid
tempo: I was not prepared for this; I told Muralov: I strongly object to tactics which cut across all the past, all the traditions of
the labour movement, not only in Russia, but throughout the
world. I asked him to write to Trotsky, because although he gave
me Trotsky's address, I could not write from Barnaul, where I
was, inasmuch as my correspondence was under certain control.
This took place in July or August 1932. One and a half years
later, in February 1934, I sent a telegram to the Central Commitiee of the C.P.S.U., saying that I had completely disarmed myself
both ideologically and organizationally and asked to be reinstated
in the Party. This telegram was insincere, I was lying. It was my
,deliberate intention to hide from the Party and the government
my association with the Intelligence Service ever since 1924, and

288

Trotsky's association with the Intelligence Service ever since 1926.
I was going to conceal my conversation with Muralov in 1932 and
the conversation which took place in 1934 in Novosibirsk, where
I stopped over on my way after I had received permission to return
to Moscow. I met Muralov on the street, and he said to me, "You
are going back at a moment when all your comrades in the
struggle have returned to active underground work." Muralov considered that I should have stayed in exile so that my stay there
would preserve those remnants of Trotskyite cadres who were in
exile at that time.
When I arrived in Moscow in May, I met Sosnovsky. Sosnovsky
told me that the former leaders of the old Trotskyite opposition
were returning again to active underground work; this was a period
which would soon come to an end, a period of certain hesitations.
I wrote to Trotsky and again pointed out that the tactics he recommended were reckless and pointed out that his position was
groundless, because judging by my impressions in Moscow and in
exile, the actual aspect of the country completely contradicted
the gloomy predictions which the Trotskyite opposition gave.
In the second half of July 1934 I received a letter from Trotsky.
I had written to Trotsky in Copenhagen and I received a reply
by the method which I suggested in my lettei.
In his reply Trotsky first of all tried to dispel my favourable
impression of Socialist construction. He wrote that I was yielding
to the mystic influence of statistical data, without considering
the process under the surface, and so on and so forth. As regards
the tactics he recommended, he wrote that be, of course, understood that after such a long period in exile, in view of my age,
fatigue, etc., I was not in a condition to take part in the active
work of the opposition in its full scope. In the letter he asked me
to utilize my extensive connections with political circles abroad,
primarily "Left" circles. I understood the import of these instructions as tollows: capitalist aggression against the Soviet
Union must be strengthened and intensified.
This was a compromise, this was, so to speak, meeting my wishes
in the sense that they recommended me somewhat more congenial
methods, in the sense of making use of my acquaintances, of my
former connections. I agreed to this proposal. I will not enter here
into psychological explanations, why and wherefore. From this
moment I already stood with both feet on the positions of Trotskyism, or rather on the positions of neo-Trotskyism, if I might
use the term.
In September 1934 I was sent to Tokyo at the head of the Soviet Red Cross Delegation to an international conference of Red
Cross Societies, which was to take place there in October. The day
after I arrived in Tokyo, I was stopped in the corridor of the jap19

289

anese Red Cross building by a certain prominent public man of
japan. I can mention his name.
THE PRESIDENT: No, there is no need.
RAKOVSKY: Very well, I will name him at the session in
camera. He invited me to tea. I made his acquaintance. He held
a position which had some relation to my mission-I want to
say, not my mission as one who belonged to the opposition, but my
governmental mission .. I accepted his amiable invitation. During the
conversation this person (here I omit various compliments, commonplaces, flattering remarks) said that the interests of the political trend to which I belonged in the U.S.S.R. an<l the interests
of a certain government fully coincided, and that he personally
welcomed my arrival in Tokyo because it would give him the
opportunity to discuss certain questions concerning both sides;
and in particular, he declared that for a certain government
and for himself my estimate of the political situation in the
Soviet Union would be of extraordinary value.
I must say that I did not anticipate a conversation like this,
it took me unawares. I said that, firstly, I was not, nor did I belong to
or take any part in the leading circles of my country. I now occupied a very modest position, a modest post in the People's Commissariat of Public Health, and unfortunately, in this connection I
could not be of any service to them. I evaded further conversation
and left.
I am giving you the gist of it, of course, without vouching for
every word. I wanted to ascertain the motives which prompted such a proposal. The same evening I had a talk with the Ambassador, Yurenev, whom I had known as a Trotskyite ever since
1926, when I spent a summer with him in the south of France at
Saint-jean-de-Luz. I told him of the rather strange words of
the person I have mentioned. I am representing it in a somewhat
more pointed form, because usually such things are wrapped up in a
lot of verbiage without any pretext for protest being given.
I told Yurenev that the idea here was to enlist me as a spy, as
an informer for a certain government.
Then Yurenev drew a letter from his pocket and told me: "The
question is decided, there is no need to hesitate." He even said:
"The die is cast." He showed me Pyatakov's letter, which I myself had brought him from Moscow. It was sent to me under such
circumstances that I could not know its contents.
I must tell you that when I arrived in Moscow after sending
my statement to the Party, I immediately went for a cure. Then
I came back, started work, and in two months left for Tokyo.
During this time I had the opportunity to see only Sosnovsky,
and went twice on business to the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, where I met Krestinsky, with whom I exchanged
290

a few words. I will speak of this later. But on the whole this was
the period when I was trying to get back into the Party and in
general avoided any meetings with known oppositionists.
just before my departure I received by messenger of the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry an envelope addressed to me
in the People's Commissariat of Health. In this envelope there
was a second envelope, addressed to Yurenev, and a note for me.
The note was from Pyatakov. In this note he congratulated me on
my return and asked me to take the letter to Yurenev and insist
on Yurenev's compliance with his request. The letter was not
coded. The contents of this letter related to the methods
used in japan for making alloys of non-ferrous metals; Pyatakov
asked Yurenev to let him know what methods were used there and
at the same time to send him literature on the subject available in
japan in English and German. But when after my conversation
with the well-known public man I have mentioned Yurenev
drew this letter from his pocket, besides the uncoded text
there was another text which had been written in invisible
ink. Then Yurenev read to me first of all what concerned me.
Pyatakov had written to him: Rakovsky, apart from his ill
health, has another reason for being cautious; this is his desire to_
get back into the Party; so that in this sense we must spare him,
but as far as possible utilize his stay in Tokyo. Then came
literally the following phrase: "It is likely that a certain
government will itself take steps in this direction" (that is, in
the direction of utilizing Rakovsky). Further Pyatakov wrote to
Yurenev about Bogomolov, the Ambassador in China, pointing
out that a certain government was dissatisfied with his political
line, that he was helping Great Britain more than he was the said
government.
Further it was pointed out that Yurenev must try to make all
possible use of Sabanin, the director of the legal department of
the People's Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, while he was in
Tokyo. Finally, Yurenev said, readingthe letter: "But this is what
I find difficult to do." The letter contained instructions that he
must take advantage of the well-known negotiations concerning the
sale of the Chinese Eastern Railway so that something might accrue to the benefit of the Trotskyites.
I have told you approximately the contents of Pyatakov's
letter to Yurenev. Yurenev was connected with the Trotskyite
underground in Moscow, with Pyatakov.
On the second or third day after my conversation with Yurenev, after a certain banquet to which all the delegates to the Red
Cross Conference had been invited, at the end of the dinner somebody approached me and said that a certain personage of high
standing, present at this dinner, wished to make my acquaintance.
19*

291

The official personage stated that he was very pleased to make
my acquaintance, etc. )hen he went on to say that our interests
coincided with the interests of a certain state, that an agreement
had been reached between the Trotskyites in the U.S.S. R. and the
representatives of a certain state, but that we did not know the
exact terms of this agreement yet.
The prominent public man who had spoken to me did so, as I
learnt, on the instructions of this high personage. After this I had
two more meetings with the public man ....
THE PRESIDENT: Excuse me, accusea Rakovsky. Seeing
that it is now ten o'clock and your evidence will last another
hour at least, you will conclude tomorrow.
The Court is adjourned until 1I a.m.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the ,Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

292

A.BATNER
Military Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, MARCH 5, 1938

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is cominfS,
please rise.
THE PRES ID ENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Rakovsky, you may conclud~ your evidence.
RAKOVSKY: Yesterday I concluded with the statement that,
after my conversation with the high personage who was close to
the Japanese government, I had three talks with the public man
of whom I have spoken, the man at the head of a big public
organization in Japan.
During the second and third meeting with the public man who
headed a big public organization in japan we established the nature of the information which I promised to supply to the agents of
the Japanese intelligence service in Moscow and also the technique of transmitting this information. While still in Tokyo, I drew
into this work Dr. Naida, secretary of the Red Cross Delegation,
of whom I already knew that he ~as a member of the underground
counter-revolutionary terrorist organization. I sent Dr. Naida
with my card to the public man and he arranged with him as
,j.o how and with whom Dr. Naida was to meet in Moscow; it
was he who acted as liaison agent between me and the Japanese
intelligence service. In Tokyo I had yet another meeting, with
a third person. All such international conferences, as you probably
know, are accompanied by all kinds of receptions, dinners, shows,
meetings, which usually serve as a background for very serious
conversations, quite legitimate, but sometimes not legitimate.
I have in mind recruiting for various purposes. I was introduced
to this third per~on by the second high personage. He asked me
to take coffee with him-this V\>as after dinner; we sat down at
a table and began to talk.
I shall not reproduce the whole conversation, and it is not necessary either; I shall give it to you in substance. He started the
conversation by saying: "We are aware that you are a very close
friend and adherent of Mr. Trotsky. I must ask you to write
to him that a certain government is dissatisfied with his articles
on the Chinese question and also with the behaviour of the Chinese Trotskyites. We have a right to expect a different line of
conduct on the part of Mr. Trotsky. Mr. Trotsky ought to under-

293

stand what is necessary for the certain government. There is no
need to go into details, but it is clear that an incident provoked
in China would be a desirable pretext for intervening in China."
I wrote to Trotsky about all this-about my negotiations in Tokyo,
about my conversations with Yurenev, about my meetings, and,
of course, about this last proposition.
I also kept Yurenev informed of all my talks. During the last
week I fell ill owing to an inflammation of the veins of my right
leg, and I stayed in the Embassy. I am mentioning this because
it gave me and Yurenev an opportunity to see more of each other.
He would come to me-the other members of the delegation
were, of course, away at such times-he would come to me
and we would talk about our common Trotskyite affairs. Yurenev was very much worried by one circumstance. "We have gotten," he said, "into such a mess that sometimes one does not
know how to behave. One is afraid that by satisfying one of
our partners we may offend another. For instance, here at present,
antagonism is arising between Great Britain and japan in connection with the Chinese question, while we have to maintain connections both with the British and Japanese intelligence services." ...
VYSHINSKY: Who do you mean, "we"?
RAKOVSKY: The Trotskyites. "The Moscow centre, in this
case Pyatakov, is complaining that Bogomolov is taking the side
of the British. And here I have to find my bearings in all this." ...
I told him: you are exaggerating the difficulty of your position.
What do we have to proceed from? We Trotskyites have to play three
cards at the present moment: the German, Japanese and British.
It was not quite clear to me, at that time at least, what the German.
card promised. Personally I thought that the possibility was not
excluded that Hitler would seek a rapprochement with the government of the U.S.S.R. I cited the policy of Richelieu: in his own
country he exterminated the Protestants, while in his foreign
policy he concluded alliances \Vith the Protestant German princes. The relations between Germany and Poland were still in the
stage of their inception at the time. Japan, on the other hand, was
a f)Otent aggressor against the U.S.S.R. for us Trotskyites the
Japanese card was extremely important, but, on the other hand,
we should not overrate the importance of japan as our ally against
the Soviet government. Even if Japanese aggression could force
its way into the territory of the U.S.S.R., it would be lost in the
vast spaces, and in the taiga. As for Great Britain, the situation
was rather more serious. At that moment Great Britain was antagonistic to japan. I am telling you about our private conversations which ought to show why we pursued one line or another. At
the moment there was antagonism between ourselves and japan,
but it should not be forgotten that England once headed a coali294

tion against the French Revolution and fought on for twentv·
five years.
THE PRESIDENT: You should dwell less on the past and
speak more a bout the Trotskyite organization.
RAKOVSKY: Thus, the conclusion was that it was necessary
to maintain the connection with the British Intelligence Service,
but to pay attention to the Japanese intelligence service at the
oresent time.
· VYSHINSKY: I did not quite get you. You '>ay: it was necessary to maintain the connection with the British Intelligence
Service and to pay attention to the Japanese i.ntelligence service.
RAKOVSKY: To pay the main attention.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, to serve both the Japanese and British intelligence services, and in addition also the German.
RAKOVSKY: According to my personal opinion at the time,
this latter was a mere prospect.
VYSHINSKY: From Krestinsky's evidence you saw that it
was not a mere prospect.
What intelligence services were you personally connected
with?
RAKOVSKY: The British and the Japanese.
VYSHINSKY: And Krestinsky? Accused Krestinsky, what
intelligence service were you connected with?
KRESTINSKY: The German.
VYSHINSKY: Prospectively or actually?
KRESTINSKY: Actually.
VYSHINSKY: Actually? Proceed, please.
RAKOV~KY: I returned from Tokyo with the credentials
of a Japanese spy in my pocket. In my present state of mind I do
not find it difficult to say so openly, to admit openly before the
people's Court what formerly I would not bring myself to admit
to my own conscience. It took me a short ti me, only a few months
one might say, to consummate that evolution of Trotskyism which
it took other Trotskyites several years to consummate. I say a few
months, because up to that time I was at a loose end, I was
not actively engaged. Trotskyism passed through a period of passive
defeatism when it was maliciously gleeful over every mistake,
every failure in the sphere of Party development and every
failure of the Soviet government in the sphere of Socialist construction. Even during that period there had already been certain
links, and in my person too, with one intelligence service or
another. I shall speak of this when I deal with my connections
with the British Intelligence Service. As I said yesterday, this
was a sporadic connection. The second period was the period of
active defeatism, a period when one does not wait for mistakes
295

or failures, for mistakes in internal work, but begins to cause
them by wrecking activities carried on according to a definite
system and program; when one no longer waits for offers to come
from the outside, by chance, but begins to look for connections;
espionage then becomes a system. This very evolution of Trotskyism-from passive defeatism to active defeatism-I passed
through during the period of 1934. Formerly Trotskyism posed
as a definite ideological current; now it has completely exposed
itself in my person. In 1934 I already saw that all the theoretical
and ideological premises-all that was a thing of the past,
all that was of no consequence whatever, including the notorious
scholastic theory of the impossibility of building Socialism in a
single country. Now we became a school of espionage, wrecking,
treason, terrorism. We were the vanguard of foreign aggression, of
international fascism, and not only in the U.S.S.R., but also in
Spain, China, throughout the world. Clearly, there was some kind
of inner connection here with our past. Nobody, I think, will
put an equation mark between us anct the fascists. This would
be a distortion of the whole picture and harmful to the truth, harmful to the struggle against the Trotskyites. There were other, farreaching calculations here. The whole policy was a policy of
adventurism, but we told ourselves (nor did I conceal it in
my conversation with Yurenev) that I would write to Trotsky that
what we were doing was a policy of putting everything at stake, of
everything for everything, but if a risky venture succeeds, the
adventurers are called great statesmen. What were our calculations? I must return to my conversations with Yurenev, because
I think that they are characteristic.
Now, let us take the question of Japanese aggressipn. It might
cau~e enormous dissatisfaction in the country and then we would
appear as friends, already bound by the ties of co-operation, in the
role of the saviours of the fatherland. And then we would already
apply the program concerning the Maritime Region, the Amur
Region, and so forth.
When I returned to Moscow I continued to be sick until
January 15, 1935. Professor Pletnev, by the way, who is present
here, and other physicians attended me. Kazakov gave me lysate
injections.
During this period Sosnovsky came to see me. Yes, I forgot
to mention one important detail, namely, that Yurenev sent a
reply to Pyatakov in a letter, written in the same way, of course,
about the connection with the intelligence service and about espionage work. It was written in invisible ink. I informed Sosnovsky of all my conversations in japan and handed over to him
Yurenev's letter to Pyatakov, written in invisible ink. During 1935 and the first half of 1936, that is to say, before the trial

296

of Kamenev and Zinoviev, I transmitted five reports to the
Japanese intelligence service through Naida. I shall not dwell on
the problems which I analysed. These problems are not the essential thing. I informed them-mainly about the effect which· the
abolition of the ration card system had on the level of wages,
about the condition of the collective farms, about the way the
industrial and financial plan was being carried out. I consciously
presented the situation and my conclusions in a very pessimistic
light, painting things in extremely dark colours. I did this in
order to whet the appetites of the aggressors.
In the beginning of 1935 I received a second letter from
Trotsky. He again dwelt on the subject which he dealt with in his
first letter and gave instructions on the necessity of isolating
Stalin, of internationally isolating the Soviet Union. This time
he dwelt already more concretely on the arguments which I was
to use for the international isolation of the Soviet Union.
Of course, he referred first of all to the Left elements abroad.
With regard to them it was necessary to play on their pacifist
sentiments. It was necessary to represent things in such a light
that the U.S.S.R. might become a cause. of war. If I should have
occasion to talk to the British Labourites, I was to approach them
from the point of view that these elements in Great Britain were
afraid of the reintroduction of compulsory military service,
which would be inevitable in case of war. As far as the Right
elements abroad were concerned, matters were simpler; their
sentiments against the Soviet Union were quite clear and
definite. With them we could speak frankly. As for the democratic
elements, we must deal with them not by a frontal attack but
through a flanking movement. Soon an occasion arose on which
I could apply these instructions of Trotsky. This was during the
visit of the French Prime Minister Laval. Among the journalists
who came from France with Laval was Emile Bure, an old close
friend of mine in France, who had gone over to the camp of the
Right Republicans and become director of one of the largest and
most influential French newspapers, "L' Ordre." I went to see
him in the hotel "Metropole" with the object of convincing him
that a rapprochement between France and the Soviet Union was
fraught with danger, that it might lead to a new preventive war
on the part of Germany. I told him that this was not the opinion
only of myself, because I knew the sentiments of the entire
opposition, their defeatist sentiments.
VYSHINSKY: What opposition~ When was that?
RAKOVSKY: This was in the middle of 1935, when Laval was
on a visit to Moscow.
VYSHINSKY: In this case, what opposition are you talking
about?

297

RAKOVSKY: I am talking both of the Rights and the Trotskyites.
VYSHINSKY: But what kind of an opposition are they? They
are a bandit gang of counter-revolutionaries.
RAKOVSKY: Citizen Procurator, you must excuse me, for
a long time this term . . .
.
VYSHINSKY: In your explanations today you are generally
permitting yourself to use quite a number of such expressions, as
if you were forgetting that you are being tried here as a member
of a counter-revolutionary bandit, espionage, diversionist organization of traitors. I consider it my duty to remind you of this
in my interrogation of you and to ask you to keep closer to the
substance of the treasonable crimes which you have committed,
to speak without philosophy and other such things which are
entirely out of place here.
RAKOVSKY: Bure replied to me: France cannot remain iso~
lated in face of the growing militarization of Germany. The aggressor must be put in a strait-jacket; this is the only means
to crush war. I wrote to Trotsky about this reply. I repeat, this
was in the summer of 1935, when Laval was on a visit in Moscow.
In the beginning of January 1936 Pyatakov telephoned me from
his office in the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry and uttered a short phrase in French: "Our friend is dissatisfied with
you, you are not active." I hung up the receiver, because I considered it absolutely out of place to carry on a conversation of
this kind over the telephone.
Some time later I met Radek, and he told me of Pyatakov's
trip to Oslo. This meeting took place in the beginning of July,
during a reception given to the International Commission on
Hygiene, which is under the auspices of the League of Nations.
Radek informed me of the negotiations between the Germans and
Trotsky, and asked for my co-operation. In his opinion it was
necessary to support Trotsky in Moscow, that is to say, with the
representatives of the German intelligence service in Moscow. I
made some critical remarks in this connection, but that is of no
consequence. What is important is that when I was leaving for
the South with this delegation I agreed with Radek that upon my
return from the South I would visit him at his country house; at that
time Radek gave me the address of his country house in Khimki.
Very shortly after my return from the South (I returned at the
end of July), the Kamenev and Zinoviev trial began and I saw
no more of Radek.
I return now to my treasonable activities prior to my exile,
and I shall begin with evidence dealing with the way I became
an agent of the Intelligence Service.
298

It happened in the end of 1924. After the fall of the MacDonald
government two Englishmen, Armstrong and Leckart, whom
I knew personally, came to visit me at the Embassy in London.
VYSHINSKY: Who were they?
RAKOVSKY: Armstrong was a former naval officer: Leckart
and Armstrong belonged to the circle of the well-known British
capitalist Lord Inverforth, a former minister in the Lloyd
George cabinet. I had met Armstrong in Lausanne shortly after
my arrival there in the beginning of 1923 during the Lausanne
negotiations. He came there and arranged for a meeting between
our People's Commissar and Lord Curzon, but he did that in a
different connection.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, in what different connection?
RAKOVSKY: In connection with the Foreign Office.
VYSHINSKY: And when you met him in 1924, in what connection was that?
RAKOVSKY: I first met him, as I said, in Lausanne, and
then I met Armstrong, who was a close acquaintance of Berns,
the naval attache of our Embassy, and together with Armstrong
and Berns I had a meeting with Lord Inverforth with reference
to arranging for credits; so that I met him that time ....
VYSHINSKY: I am not interested in the meetings you had
with various lords; I am interested in your criminal activities on
behalf of the British Intelligence Service.
RAKOVSKY: But since you asked me when I met Armstrong ...
VYSHINSKY: I asked you, and you said that Armstrong came
to see you in 1924.
RAKOVSKY: At the end of 1924.
VYSHINSKY: You said that when you met him this time it
was in a different connection, so I am asking you, in what different
connection?
RAKOVSKY: In connection with negotiations for opening
credits in England.
VYSHINSKY: Thtit is to say, also in an official capacity?
RAKOVSKY: It was in an official capacity, while I was carrying
out instructions.
VYSHINSKY: How did it come about that you were recruited
by the British Intelligence Service? This is what interests us.
This is what we accuse you of.
RAKOVSKY: Citizen Procurator, I took it that you were
asking when I became acquainted with Armstrong.
VYSHINSKY: In 1923. You answered that.
RAKOVSKY: And then I met him in London, prior to this.
VYSHINSKY: If I understood you correctly at the preliminary
investigation, and if I understood co_rrectly what is contained in

299

the records of the preliminary investigation, you were already
enlisted as an agent of the InteIIigence Service in 1924. Is that so?
RAKOVSKY: It is.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us under what circumstances you were
enlisted, under what circumstances you became an agent of the
Intellig'ence Service in I 924.
RAKOVSKY: I shall take the liberty of repeating i.his part:
after the fall of the MacDonald government in November 1924
Armstrong and Leckart, whom I had known before and in a
. different connection, called on me.
·
VYSHINSKY: Well, if you please. how die your enlistment
take place? I understand that it may not be very pleasant for
you to speak of it now, but it is essential.
.
RAKOVSKY: I have explained everything in my testimony
and here.
VYSHINSKY: In this case, will you be so kind as to tell us
about just this question, about this fact, how you were enlisted?
RAKOVSKY: Armstrong said: "\Ve have great sympathy
for you, we want to warn you of a danger which is threatening
you." He took out from his pocket a slip of paper which he showed
me.
VYSHINSKY: What kind of a slip of paper?
RAKOVSKY: It was a letter, typewritten and bearing my
forged signature.
VYSHINSKY: Was it really forged?
RAKOVSKY: It was.
VYSHINSKY: And to whom was this letter addressed?
RAKOVSKY: There was no address.
VYSHINSKY: For whom was it intended?
RAKOVSKY: I shall tell you the contents of the letter.
VYSHINSKY: You do not want me to ask you any questions?
RAKOVSKY: No, not that, I have no right.
VYSHINSKY: You have a right.
RAKOVSKY: Ask questions if you please, it may so happen
that your questioPs will refer to what I want to tell and I shall
answer willingly.
VYSHINSKY: For whom was this letter intended?
RAKOVSKY: This letter was written to Germany, but there
was no address.
VYSHIN$KY: The letter was intended for Germany?
RAKOVSKY: It followed from the contents that it was intended
for the German government.
VYSHINSKY: For the German intelligence service?
RAKOVSKY: Possiblv.
VYSHINSKY: What -did the letter say?
RAKOVSKY: The letter said approximately the following:
300

"I am enclosing a list of Rumanian commercial firms and newspaper offices which should be won over to the side ot Germanv
in order to draw Ruma11ia itself into the war on the side of Germany."
VYSHINSKY: What is the meaning of these contents of the
letter?
RAKOVSKY: The contents of the letter meanf that there
existed a connection between me and the German intelligence
service, the German government, or some German organization.
VYSHINSKY: And you helped Germany in enlisting Rumanian citizens on Rumanian territory to aid Germany?
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY. Was that what it was about?
RAKOVSKY. Yes.
VYSHINSKY. And tell us, were you in Rumania at the time
to which this letter refers?
RAKOVSKY: At the time to which this letter refers?
VYSHINSKY: Yes.
RAKOVSKY: The letter was dated Berne, October 1915,
but at that time I was not at Berne.
VYSHINSKY: But were you in Rumania?
RAKOVSKY: Yes, of course, I was connected with the labour
movement.
VYSHINSKY: You leave the labour movement out of this;
I am not speaking of the labour movement 1 which, according to
your own evidence, you betrayed in 1924. Did you say that you
became an agent of the British Intelligence Service in 1924?
RAKOVSKY: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Is that betrayal of the working class? We may
as well clarify this point once we have touched on this question.
RAKOVSKY: I did betray.
VYSHINSKY: Therefore speak less of the labour movement
and dwell on the questions which are more closely related to this
trial. In what year were you in Rumania?
RAKOVSKY: I was in Rumania from 1904 to 1907 and from
1912 to l 917.
VYSHINSKY: Were you in Rumania during the war?
RAKOVSKY: I was.
VYSHINSKY: What was your official occupation in Rumania?
What were your means of existence?
RAKOVSKY: My means of existence?
VYSHINSKY: Yes.
RAKOVSKY: I was the son of a wealthy man.
VYSHINSKY: Who was he? What did his wealth consist of?
Was he a manufacturer or a landowner?
RAKOVSKY: My father was a landlord.

301

VYSHINSKY: A landlord?
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did he own any industrial enterprise?
RAKOVSKY: He owned no industrial enterprise.
VYSHINSKY: Any commercial enterprise?
RAKOVSKY: He did not engage in commerce.
VYSHINSKY: What did he engage in?
RAKOVSKY: My father died in 1903.
VYSHINSKY: I am not reproaching you on account of your
father. You yourself mentioned him. I am asking, what were your
means of existence?
RAKOVSKY: My means of existence were the income I received
from mv father's property.
VYSHINSKY: So you lived on income which you received
as a rentier?
RAKOVSKY: As a rural proprietor.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, as a landlord?
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, it was not only your father who was
a landlord, but you also were a landlord, an exploiter?
RAKOVSKY: Well, of course I was an exploiter. The fact
is I lived on an income; and income, as is well known, accrues
from surplus value.
VYSHINSKY: And the surplus value was in your hands?
RAKOVSK Y: Yes, the surplus value was in my hands.
VYSHINSKY: Hence I am not mistaken when I say that
you were a landlord?
RAKOVSKY: You are not mistaken.
VYSHINSKY: Well, now. It was important for me to establish
whence you received your income.
RAKOVSKY: But it is important for me to say what this
inwme was spent for.
VYSHINSKY: This is a different matter. Did you at that
time maintain relations with various landlord and capitalist
circles to any extent?
RAKOVSKY: To a very small extent. If I had to make a loan
in a bank, then I had business relations with that bank. As a matter
of fact, I lived in Rumania for a very short period of time.
VYSHINSKY: But you lived in Rumania all through the war?
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: I want to put the question bluntly: I have
a grave suspicion that your signature on the letter which Armstrong presented to you, a letter addressed to the German intelligence service, was not forged but was actually signed by you,
because you were then already an agent of the German intelligence
service. Is this right or wrong?
302

RAKOVSKY: Absolutely wrong.
VYSHINSKY: Let us then pass on to the further business,
to your co-operation with the British Intelligence Service. Proceed.
RAKOVSKY: When Armstrong and Leckart showed me this
document I said: "Why, this is a gross forgery." The document
was dated October 15 at Berne, and at that time I was in Rumania, not in Berne. And then, what was the sense of my writing
to the German government about Rumanian commercial firms
and Rumanian newspapers, when Rumania, which had been a
military ally of Germany for dozens of years, was a German agency-there were German firms, German daily newspapers, German banks there-what could I tell them? Why, the Germans
knew a thousand times better what Rumania was and what Rumanian commercial houses were. This was an absurdity. It was
not only a forgery, but a stupid forgery. Then they remarked:
"You maintain that the Zinoviev letter is a forgery too, but here
is the result: the fall of the MacDonald government and the forthcoming annulment of the treaty which you signed with the British government.'' I must tell you that I retorted with extreme
indignation: "You are just blackmailers." This they denied,
stating that in ca1Iing on me they were actuated by the best af
intentions. "Do you know," they asked me, "why you received
your agrement in England?" I said that I did. They were
hinting at the fact that the agrement given me in England when
I was first appointed Ambassador had been held back by the British
government in connection with a certain campaign which had begun
in the British press. Later the British government granted it,
when it became convinced that this campaign was based on
sheer calumny-I was alleged to have made a speech in Kharkov
that I was going to England to organize the social revolution.
Then they told me: "No, you do not know everything, we have
been making inquiries about you from Mr. Eastman (Eastman, the
American Trotskyite) and learnt that you belong to Mr. Trotsky's
faction, and that you are on intimate terms with him. And only
in consideration of this circumstance did the Intelligence Service
consent to your being accredited Ambassador to this country."
This statement changed the whole situation. They said: "No,
we are not here as your enemies." I told them: "First of all,
I must have confirmation that you really represent the Intelligence Service in this case" Shortly after, I was invited to dinner
in a restaurant in Oxford Street, where there was a person
whom they introduced as the chief of the Russian department of
the Intelligence Service. I do not remember his name exactly,
this was in 1924; if my memory does not fail me, it was either
Richardson or Robertson. He confirmed that Armstrong and
Leckart were acting on behalf of the Intelligence Service, that
303

the question at issue concerned the formation of close, friendly
relations between certain political trends, that here there was no
need to speak of vulgar espionage, etc. But inasmuch as Richardson or Robertson was a stranger to me, I said: "I must have extra
confirmation from an official person, someone I know.''
VYSHINSKY: And the man you were talking to, what was
his name, do you remember?
RAKOVSKY: I said that I do not remember exactly.
VYSHINSKY: You said either Robertson or Richardson?
RAKOVSKY: Perhaps it was Nicholson, something like that.
They promised that I would be given this confirmation. After
this I went to Moscow. For me it was important to gain time.
I arrived in Moscow and told Trotsky. Trotsky said that the
forged letter was a pretext for conversation, that this was something to think about. "In general, it must be borne in mind that
our situation," said Trotsky, "is such that we will soon amount
to nothing. You have been shifted from the Ukraine; prior to this,
while Lenin was still alive, Krestinsky, Serebryakov, Preobrazhensky and Smirnov were removed from the Central Committee.''
., THE PRESIDENT: You are dealing with your connection
with the British Intelligence Service, but instead are enumerating
who was removed from the Central Committee in what year. This
is all known.
RAKOVSKY: Trotsky agreed that connections with the British Intelligence Service should be established, and, so to speak,
gave me his blessing in this enterprise. He pressed me to be extremely careful and to ascertain in what way they could be of
service to Trotskyism. Soon after returning to London I was invited to see a certain official person, who confirmed that the proposal made by the Intelligence Service had indeed been sanctioned.
On their part Armstrong and Leckart said that the liaison agent
between me and them would be the journalist Farbman. For
this purpose I enlisted two more employees of the Embassy as
liaison agents. This happened in the beginning of 1925. Before
leaving London r managed to hand over a document, a review
of Soviet policy in the Central Asia national republics from the
point of view of a man who wanted to encourage a hostile attitude
toward the U.S.S.R. In October of the same year, 1925, I was
transferred to Paris as Ambassador. In this position it was difficult for me to maintain direct connections with the Intelligence
Service.
When Farbman came to see me next, we consulted together
and decided to enlist Mdivani for direct work for the Intelligence Service.
VYSHINSKY: You are going into the question of whom to
304

enlist, while we are interested to know what you did, what
espionage services you performed.
RAKOVSKY: Recruiting.
VYSHINSKY: You have spoken about this. Further, apart
from recruiting?
RAKOVSKY: Then my connections with the Intelligence
Service were broken off, from the time r left London-rather
not my connections but my reports.
VYSHINSKY: The supplying of information?
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And then it was resumed?
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In what year?
RAKOVSKY: Ten years later.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say?
RAKOVSKY: I resumed furnishing informatio.n at the beginning of 1936. My connections were resumed after a lapse of
ten years.
VYSHINSKY: And then you began supplying information.
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Under what circumstances were your connections resumed?
RAKOVSKY: In the summer of 1934, after I returned from
exile, my connections were resumed. An acquaintance of mine
came to Moscow, an Englishwoman who reminded me that contact with the Intelligence Service ought to be resumed.
VYSHINSKY: Why did this question interest the Englishwoman?
RAKOVSKY: I had known her in London. It can be affirmed
that she herself was connected with the Intelligence Service.
VYSHINSKY: In other words, a British woman spy?
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What is her name?
RAKOVSKY: Lady Paget.
VYSHINSKY: Lady Paget. What is her position in society?
RAKOVSKY: She is a well-known philanthropist; during
the war she had a hospital in Kiev.
VYSHINSKY: That is how you regarded her-a philanthropist?
RAKOVSKY: As a sideline.
VYSHINSKY: just as you are a philanthropist as a sideline?
RAKOVSKY: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: You resumed this contact through Paget also
with Trotsky's knowledge?
RAKOVSKY: No.
20

305

VYSHINSKY: Have you been in contact with Trotsky since
1934?
RAKOVSKY: Yes. I wrote to him in 1934, rather in 1935.
VYSHINSKY: You informed Trotsky of this connection of
yours with the Intelligence Service through Lady Paget?
RAKOVSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: You did not specially inform him?
RAKOVSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us what you know of Trotsky's connections
with the Intelligence Service.
RAKOVSKY: It was just before Trotsky's exile to Alma-Ata.
At first he was to have been sent to Astrakhan, but he managed
to get this rescinded and changed to Alma-Ata instead. Calling
on him at his apartment in Granovsky Street, r found him very
pleased that Astrakhan was changed for Alma-Ata. I was
surprised. After all, it was several days' journey from Frunze
tp Alma-Ata (at that time there was no railway there). He
replied: "But it is nearer to the Chinese border," and he
pointed to a roll of maps. He gave me to understand that he
intended to make his escape. I asked him how his escape
could be organized across Western China, through deserts,
over mountains, without resources. "The Intelligence Service
will help me," said Trotsky. And here he told me in strict confidence that he had made criminal contact with the f ntelligence
Service in 1926.
VYSHINSKY: Through whom?
RAKOVSKY: Through one of the representatives of the
Lena Goldfields concession.
VYSHINSKY: Did he have anything to do with this concession firm?
RAKOVSKY: At that time he was chairman of the Chief Concessions Board.
VYSHINSKY: So when he was chairman of the Chief Concessions Board he made contact with the Intelligence Service
through a representative of the Lena Goldfields?
RAKOVSKY: Absolutely correct. He told me another fact.
He had already managed to render a certain service to the British
Intelligence Service. This was at the beginning of 1927. According to
him, in return for certain services rendered him by this organization,
he helped the Conservatives to bring about the rupture of relations
with the U.S.S.R. He had advised the Intelligence Service that a
convenient incident could be brought about by organizing a raid on
Arcos. He mentioned certain London Trotskyites who were employed
there, including one Millier or Miller, through whom specially
fabricated documents were planted on the Arcos premises to be found
during the raid, and that he had in this way given Joynson
306

Hicks (then Home Secretary) something by which to convince
his colleagues of the necessity of breaking off diplomatic
relations between the U.S.S.R. and England. The opposition
at that time expected that it would be able to take advantage
of the difficulties. I myself had been connected with the Intelligence Service since the end of 1924, that is why I easily understood
all that Trotsky told me of his connection with the Intelligence
Service. I must mention another fact of my treasonable work,
dating back to 1927:. my negotiations with Right capital'ist
circles in France. This began during the July Plenum of 1927.
After Stalin's speech, where he came out sharply against the socalled Clemenceau thesis of Trotsky, I had dinner with Trotsky
and asked him: "I can't understand why Stalin puts the question
so sharply. I see no particular point in this comparison wjth Clemenceau." Trotsky rejoined: "Stalin understands perfectly well
what he is doing. Stalin considers that if the gulf between the
opposition and the Party gets wider, then by the very logic of
things the opposition must adopt consistent defeatist positions."
The next day I had another talk with Trotsky. He said: "I have
come to the conclusion that we must give instructions to our
confederates abroad, Ambassadors and trade representatives,
to sound out the conservative circles in the capitalist countries
to which they have been accredited to what extent the Trotskyites can count on their support." I told him that in France it is
principally up to Pyatakov. He asked me to inform him about
this.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rakovsky, has what you are
saying now any bearing on your connections with the British
I ntelligenee Service?
RAKOVSKY: It has.
THE PRESIDENT: You are giving evidence on your connec~
tion with the British Intelligence Service. You went on -to 1934,
and now you are going back to 1927.
RAKOVSKY: I have nothing more to say on the British
Intelligence Service. If you have any questions . . .
THE PRESIDENT: I understood that in 1934 you resumed
your connection with the British Intelligence Service and your
work in it; and now you have reverted again to 1927. Tell us, after
the attempts to enlist you in the British Intelligence Service
in 1934, did you take any part in the work of the British Intelligence Service?
RAKOVSKY: Yes. I have already said that in the beginning
of 1936 I again began to supply them with information. I gave
them an analysis of the new Constitution from the standpoint of the
relations between the peripheral republics and the centre, further20*

307

more, my analysis of the new Constitution was absolutely unfavourable.
THE PRESIDENT: To whom did you give this analysis?
RAKOVSKY: Donskoy came to me.
THE PRESIDENT: Who is Donskoy?
RAKOVSKY: An employee of the People's Commissariat of
Health. I passed on this analysis through him. This was at the
beginning of 1936.
THE PRESIDENT: This was the last information you gave?
'RAKOVSKY: It was.
THE PRESIDENT (to Vyshinsky): Have you any questions?
VYSHINSKY: No.
· RAKOVSKY: Now I can return . . .
THE PRESIDENT: Then that will do.
VYSHINSKY: No. I have no more questions to ask on this
part of the testimony of the accused, but he has to continue his
testimony.
THE PRESIDENT (to Rakovsky): What else do you want to
talk about?
RAKOVSKY: I want to speak on the negotiations which
Trotsky instructed me to conduct in France in the summer of
l927.
THE PRESIDENT: If you please.
RAKOVSKY: I met the deputy Nicole in Roye. Nicole is a very
big flax spinner in the north, a factory owner. I knew him because he bought flax from us. I made his acquaintance the first
time I arrived in Paris, and knew that he belonged to Right Republican circles. When I met him, he himself opened the conversation, because the incidents at the Plenum were being discussed by
the whole French press. In short, a conversation began in connection
with the Plenum. I asked him then what opportunities or prospects there were for the opposition-whether support could
be sought among French capitalist circles aggressively inclined
to the U.S.S.R. He replied: "Of course, and to a larger extent
than you perhaps expect.'' But this, as he said, would mainly
depend on two circumstances. The first circumstance was that
the opposition should become indeed a real force, and the second
circumstance was to what extent the opposition would agree to
concessions for French capital.
The second conversation I had in Paris also took place in
1927, in September, and was with the deputy Louis Dreyfus,
a big grain merchant. I must say that both the conversation and
the conclusion were analogous to those which I had with Nicole.
Now about my counter-revolutionary connections. I have
nothing more to say about my treasonable activities in the period

308

preceding my exile. Now about my counter-revolutionary connections. When I returned from exile in 1934, I met Sosnovsky
and kept in touch with him. In March 1935 Sosnovsky informed
me that a bloc had been formed between the Rights and the Trotskyites quite a long time ago, but when, in what period, he did
not say. He told me that complete agreement had been reached
as to aims and methods-espionage, diversion, wrecking. He
mentioned a detail like this: the Rights spoke of the advantages of the tactics they followed in regard to the Party, because,
unlike the Trotskyites, who gave open battle and thereby
·exposed all their cadres, the Rights had given instructions to
all their cadres to exercise the greatest secrecy, so as to be invulnerable. That is how they were preserving their cadres. I am
giving you in general outline what Sosnovsky said to me then.
Another underground worker whom I met in 1934 was Krestinsky. I visited him twice at the People's Commissariat in connection with my trip to Tokyo. At that time Litvinov was away and
Krestinsky was temporarily taking his place. Our first conversation for the most part concerned my forthcoming speech at the
Tokyo conference. Towards the end he congratulated me on
my statement . . .
VYSHINSKY: On what?
RAKOVSKY: On my statement.
VYSHINSKY: To whom?
RAKOVSKY: To the Central Committee. I told him I was
back at work again. During the first conversation Krestinsky
looked at me and said nothing. We were sort of feeling out
each other. The second time I saw him he said he was engaged in
underground work.
VYSHINSKY: As a Trotskyite?
RAKOVSKY: As a Trotskyite. As to the nature of his
work, we had a talk when I returned from Tokyo. But I must
say I did not meet Krestinsky after that and had no conversations of any kind with him. I met Bukharin on the street
in 1934, when he was on his way to make a report at the International Writers' Congress. This was the only time we met. I saw
Rykov once in the Council of People's Commissars. My last meeting with Sosnovsky took place in December 1935.
VYSHINSKY: Tell me, how would you briefly formulate
your admission of guilt before the Soviet Union?
RAKOVSKY: I admit that beginning with 1924 I became a
traitor to the Soviet Socialist fatherland.
VYSHINSKY: And your activity-at first factional, then
counter-revolutionary underground Trotskyite criminal activitybegan in what year?
RAKOVSKY: I have been personally acquainted with Trotsky
309

since, 1903. This acquaintance grew closer and I was his intimate friend.
VYSHINSKY: His political friend?
RAKOVSKY: Political when political questions were con·
cerned.
VYSH INSKY: And his personal friend?
RAK OVSKY: And personal.
VYSHINSKY: And such you have remained until recently?
RAKOVSKY: And such I have remained until recently.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, for nearly thirty-five years you
have been bound to Trotsky by political and personal friendship.
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You waged a struggle against the Party and
the Soviet government?
RAKOVSKY: In 1921 the trade union discussion was, one
might say, a "trial of strength." And from the end of 1924 clandestine connections were formed which came within the provisions
of the Criminal Code.
VYSHINSKY: From 1924 clandestine, criminal connections
punishable by Soviet law, and criminal activity began?
RAKOVSKY: Which I have recounted.
VYSHINSKY: Which you have admitted. For· the sake of what
did you Trotskyites wage this struggle against the Soviet state?
RAKOVSKY: For the sake of the seizure of power.
VYSHINSKY: And further, seizure of power for what object?
RAKOVSKY: The main object was to destroy the achievements which exist at the present moment.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, in other words, to destroy
the Socialist order?
RAKOVSKY: The return, I do not say openly, of the capitalist system . . . .
VYSHINSKY: You won't say this openly?
RAKOVSKY: r want to say that it did not figure in my mind
as an open, obvious aim, but in my subconscious mind I cannot
help realizing that this is what I was after.
VYSHINSKY: What premise and what historical prognosis
did you act upon?
RAKOVSKY: A very indefinite prognosis. This was an adventure-if power can be seized, all right, if not . . .
VYSHINSKY: But first of all you proceeded from the main
Trotskyite thesis that in the U.S.S.R., taken alone, its economic
and cultural level being what it is, it is impossible to build
Socialist society.
RAKOVSKY: This ideological premise went by the board.

310

VYSHINSKY: It subsequently went by the board because it
was replaced by some other premise?
RAKOVSKY: There was no ideological premise whatsoever.
VYSHINSKY: There was no ideological premise whatsoever?
RAKOVSKY: No.
VYSHfNSKY: And the object was a rabid struggle against the
Socialist state for the purpose of seizing power in the interestswhen all's said and done, whose interests?
RAKOVSKY: Citizen Prosecutor, if I tell you that we wanted
to seize power in order to hand it over to the fascists, we would
not only be the criminals we are, but we would be fools. But . . .
VYSHINSKY: But?
RAKOVSKY: But when we thought it possible to seize power
and to hold it without handing it over to the fascists, it was
insanity, it was a utopia.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, if you had managed to seize
power it would inevitably have fallen into the hands of the fascists?
RAKOVSKY: I share this estimate entirely.
VYSHINSKY: So you wanted to seize power with the help
of the fascists?
RAKOVSKY: With the help of the fascists.
VYSHINSKY: If the fascists secured the seizure of power
for you, in whose hands would the power be?
RAKOVSKY: History knows . . . .
VYSHINSKY: No, you leave history alone.
RAKOVSKY: No standard answer can be given to this question. But, if you like, the result would have been something
like the Petliura regime in the Ukraine.
VYSHINSKY: "Something like" depends on many circumstances which you do not control. I ask you, did the Trotskyites
and the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," whose representatives
are sitting here in the dock, figure on seizing power and destroying
Soviet government by their own efforts?
RAKOVSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: No? On whose help was the ''bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" relying for the seizure of power? Whose help?
RAKOVSKY: The help of an aggressor, a fascist aggressor ..
VYSHINSKY: As a result of the defeat, the dismemberment
of the U.S.S.R., and so forth, which we have already elucidated
here. I ask you now: if your bloc figured on seizing power,
with the help of fascist aggressors, and this was your only hope,
in whose hands wo'uld this power be-in the hands of the bloc or
in the hands of the fascist aggressors?
RAKOVSKY: In the long run it would have fallen into the
hands of the fascist aggressors.
VYSHINSKY: In the long run, and from the very outset. Conse311

quently your "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was one of the
detachments of the fascist aggressors, and you, as one of the
most active and most prominent Trotskyites and leaders of the
Trotskyite underground in the U.S.S.R., admit yourself guilty
of this?
RAKOVSKY: I admit it.
VYSHINSKY: And you personally furthered the aims and interests of this fascism?
RAKOVSKY: I admit it.
VYSH INSKY: You acted by methods of espionage? .
RAKOVSKY: I admit it.
VYSH INSKY: Preparing the defeat of the U.S.S.R. in a
coming war in case of attack on the Soviet Union?
RAKOVSKY: I admit it.
VYSHINSKY: Preparing to weaken the might and defence
capacity of the U.S.S.R. by methods of wrecking, diversion and
terrorism?
RAKOVSKY: I admit it.
VYSHINSKY: Is this reality or fantasy? Or, as you call it, an
adventure?
RAK OVSKY: You have misunderstood me. I say adventure
in the sense of achieving ends. Seizing power.
VYSHINSKY: Of course, all this is an adventure, because
it is unattainable.
RAKOVSKY: Because it could not have succeeded.
VYSHINSKY: And never will succeed.
RAKOVSKY: I don't doubt it.
VYSHINSKY: But this was a real program?
RAKOVSKY: Yes.
VYSH INSKY: That is how it was in reality?
RAKOVSKY: That is how it was, yes.
VYSHINSKY: With your participation?
RAKOVSKY: With my participation.
VYSHINSKY: What you have done is high treason?
RAKOVSKY: I have said so already.
VYSHINSKY: This is not only treason to the Soviet state~
but treason to the whole international labour movement? You
plead guilty to this?
RAK OVSKY: I do.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
RAKOVSKY: I must say that I have pleaded guilty to this
from the moment when I decided to give complete, exhaustive
and frank testimony. For eight months I denied everything
and refused to testify.
VYSHINSKY: Following the instructions and tactics of the
Trotskyites?
·
312

R~KOVSKY: It i.s t~e application of the old revolutionary
practices and the apphcat10n of the counter-revolutionary practices.
VYSHINSKY: What have you got to do with revolutionary
practices? You have still some phraseology left, but that is another
matter.
RAKOVSKY: But it cannot be denied that I once belonged to ...
VYSHINSKY: But you were arrested not once upon a timer
but now, by the Soviet authorities, and you imagined that you
could use against the investigation authorities of the Soviet
state the old methods which you used once when you were among
revolutionaries?
RAKOVSKY: It means that for eight months I continued toIive with the same old Trotskyite counter-revolutionary ideology.
VYSHINSKY: That is what I am saying. And not only the
ideology, but the tactics as well.
RAKOVSKY: And the tactics. And then-if you will allow
me, I will say.
VYSHINSKY: And then, as they say, you laid down your
arms.
RAKOVSKY: I will tell you what prompted me . . .
VYSHINSKY: I have no objection if you will deal briefly
with this, without long historical digressions. No objections~
on my part.
RAKOVSKY: Very briefly. As I said, it was only in the eighth
month that I began to make a clean breast of my main activities.
VYSHINSKY: Criminal activities.
RAKOVSKY: My criminal activities, of course. But before
this the thought frequently arose in my mind: was I doing right
in denying? Nobody will deny that imprisonment, solitude in
general, makes people undertake a revaluation of values. But I
remember, and will never forget as long as I live, the circumstances which finally impelled me to give evidence. During one
of the examinations, this was in the summer, I learnt, in the
first place, that Japanese aggression had begun against China,
against the Chinese people, I learnt of Germany's and Italy's undisguised aggression against the Spanish people. . . .
I learnt of the feverish preparations which all the fascist
states were making to unleash a world war. What a reader usually
absorbs every day in small doses in telegrams, I received at
once in a big dose. This had a stunning effect on me. All my past
rose before me. Of course this past may be reduced to naught
and will be obliterated by my disgraceful actions, but as an
inner motive, nothing and nobody can do anything against it. All
my past rose before me, my responsibilities, and it became clear
to me that I myself was a party to this, that I was responsible,
that I myself had helped the aggressors with my treasonable

313

activities. I knew that I was not alone, that I was harbouring
jllusions about them. Former heads of the government, former
People's Commissars, former Assistant People's Commissars,
former Ambassadors had become entangled in this web. And then
I became a judge over myself, I sat in judgment over myself. This
is a court which no one will reproach with being biased.
I sat in judgment over myself. I had given myself to the labour
movement from my youth, and where had I got to? I had
reached a stage when I facilitated the vilest work with my
actions, I had facilitated the fascist aggressors' preparations to
destroy culture, civilization, all the achievements of democracy,
all the achievements of the working class.
That is what induced me to speak, that is what overcame
my obstinacy, my false shame born of vanity, fear for my own
fate,' which was not worthy of a man who had once taken part
in the revolutionary movement. My rancour, which all of
us harboured, some. to a greater and some to a lesser extent, ran.cour against the leadership, rancour against particular individuals, had played a great part. Rancour and ambition fell from
me. I considered that from now on my duty was to help in this
struggle against the aggressor, that I would go and expose myself fully and entirely, and I told the investigator that on the
following day I would begin to give complete, exhaustive testimony. I must say that the testimony which I gave here is abso Iutely complete, sincere and exhaustive.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for twenty minutes.

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
We will proceed to the examination of the accused Zelensky.
Accused Zelensky, do you confirm the testimony you gave at the
preliminary investigation?
ZELENSKY: Yes, I do. And I request the Court to permit me
to recount the incriminating episodes of my treacherous and criminal activity as a member of the counter-revolutionary traitor-0us "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," whose aim it was
to restore capitalism in the Land of Soviets.
THE PRESIDENT: Briefly and more to the point.
ZELENSKY: First of all I must dwell on my gravest crimemy work in the tsarist Okhrana. I was an agent of the Samara
branch of the Okhrana from 1911 until 1913. The circumstan.ces under which I was recruited were as follows: in the summer
of 1911 my home was searched, and a number of documents were
found there incriminating me as a member of the Social-Democratic
314

organization. I was taken to the gendarmerie headquarters, and
examined by Colonel Betipazh, who told me that either they
would stage a trial and send me to penal servitude or I would
have to become an informer of the Okhrana. I knew several
,cases where the Samara Okhrana had engineered trials of this
kind. My courage failed me, and instead of refusing I aareed
to become an informer, yielded to persuasion, and committel'treason and treachery to the cause of the revolution.
I have no mitigating circumstances to plead. I cannot plead
youth, since I was twenty-one years of age, I cannot
plead inexperience, since I had been taking part in the revolutionary movement since 1906. Twice before the incident in
Samara I had been arrested, exiled, and so had had my "baptism of fire." This makes my crime all the more grave.
When I was recruited I was given the pseudonym "Ochkasty."
I was instructed to give reports on the work of the local SocialDemocratic Bolshevik group and its struggle against the Liquidators.
Subsequently, I regularly received money for this treacherous work,
25, 40, 50 and even 100 rubles. This went on until February 1912.
In this period my treacherous criminal work consisted of the
following. I gave information about the work of the Bolsheviks in
the mutual aid society of the printers' club and the work of the
Bolsheviks in the consumers' co-operative society. I gave a general description of the work of the Bolshevik Social-Democratic
group in Samara. It goes without saying that I used to meet
at a secret rendezvous an officer of the gendarmerie. I did not
know his name; he was called Vasily Konstantinovich. r used to
tel1 him the names of the leading workers of the Samara organization. The promise which the gendarmes made when they first
began to persuade me, namely, that I would not be forced to give
any names, of course proved false. At first general information
was demanded, and then the names of active participants in the
revolutionary movement. I betrayed a number of people, and they
were arrested. Apart from acting as an informer, the gendarmes
-commissioned me to act as an agent-provocateur: I was instructed
to get in touch with the newspaper men on the local newspapers.
This I did not succeed in doing because I had very strained personal relations with the Social-Democrats working on one newspaper, and in the case of the other newspaper, where the editor
was the late Svidersky, the fact of the matter was that Svidersky
at that time held views that actually were Cadet views. I was
instructed to organize a printshop. I was instructed to organize
the collection of membership dues and issue receipt books with
seals, that is to say, I was instructed to prepare material evidence, so that in the event of the organization being arrested this
would provide grounds for a trial under Article 102 and for a sen:315

tence of penal servitude. In February 1912 I was arrested along with
the people I had given away: Buyanov, Blagodarova, Levin,
Vulfson, Kuchmenko. In 1912 Serebryakov came to Samara
in connection with the preparations for the January Conference,
and again after the January Conference. I reported Serebryakov's arrival and he was arrested together with us. I also reported the address which Serebryakov had brought for contacts with abroad. When I was arrested and put in the Samara
prison, I wrote to Betipazh, requesting to be summoned for
examination, because I wanted to know the reasons for my
arrest. Betipazh summoned me and said that the reason for my
arrest was to safeguard me. "The better for you that we arrested you.'' I remained in prison for six months, after ·which
I was exiled to Narym Territory. Before starting out, I was visited in prison by the same officer of the gendarmerie with whom I
had had meetings at the secret rendezvous, and he demanded
that I report from my place of exile about the moods among
the exiles.
I must say that apart from being in direct contact with the
gendarme officer, the Okhrana put me in touch with another
agent-the provocateur Polonko, who delivered part of the information which I supplied, that is to say, he was the liaison man.
Having put me under obligation to send information from
exile, the gendarme headquarters gave me a secret address for
correspondence, namely, Averbuch's print shop. I was told
by the investigator that later, on the basis of this testimony,
Averbuch, when examined, fully confirmed what I had said.
Thus when I arrived in Narym as an exile I was already a traitor
to the labour movement.
Of course it would be ludicrous to say just now, and this is not
the time nor the place, how I was tormented by my own treachery.
From Narym I sent two letters, after which my contact with the
Okhrana was broken off. I must explain the circumstances under
which this rupture took place. As it seemed to me then,
I had two possibilities of breaking off connections. The first
possibility of making an honest confession, if one might speak
of an honest intent in a case like this, was to report my treachery to
the Party organization, hand myself over for judgment by the
Party organization and abide by the decision of the Party organization. This was the only proper honest course in the present
crime.
I did not adopt this course. I broke off connections in the
following way. At the beginning of 1913 I fell seriously ill. After
this, when the thaw set in, I was sent to a small place in the Narym Territory called Barabel, where there were only a few exiles,
and by spring I managed to reach Narym. Inasmuch as I hid
316

my crimes from the Party organizations and the Party members,
I enjoyed their trust as a Party member. I accepted at that time
the proposal of Alexander. Smirnov . . .
VYSHINSKY: You are going over to the next part of your
testimony.
ZELENSKY: At first I should like to say everything that
.concerns . . .
VYSHINSKY: I think we had better finish first with this
period of your work in the Okhrana.
ZELENSKY: just as you like.
VYSHINSKY: About your work as an informer, as an Okhrana
agent, as agent of the Samara Gendarmerie Headquarters, have
you said everything already, or do you wish to add anything?
ZELENSKY: I think that is all.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Then allow me to put a few
questions.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: In what month were you recruited?
ZELENSKY: It was in the summer-I think in June or July.
VYSHINSKY: June or July of what year?
ZELENSKY: 1911.
VYSH INS KY: Do you know whether the gendarmerie headquarters took any interest in you when you were under arrest in
1912?
ZELENSKY: I do not understand . . . .
VYSHINSKY: You were arrested in 1912?
ZELENSKY: Yes, I was. I have already mentioned this.
VYSH INSKY: Do you not know whether the gendarmerie
headquarters took an interest in you personally when you were
under arrest in 1912? Didn't they inquire from other Okhrana
branches about the reasons for your arrest, what had happened
to you, and so forth?
ZELENSKY: I do not know. They probably did make inquiries, but I know nothing about it.
VYSHINSKY: You do not know?
ZELENSKY: I think that since I was arraigned in other
places they would probably make inquiries.
VYSHINSKY: In August 1911 or in the spring of 19111 have no exact information-you were searched?
ZELENSKY: That was the very search after which I was
taken to the gendarmerie headquarters where I was recruited.
VYSHINSKY: And you were recruited?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Before this occasion you had no connections
at all with the Okhrana?
317

ZELENSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Then how do you explain that on August 11,
1911, the chief of the Saratov Provincial Gendarmerie Headquarters.
sent a letter of inquiry through the district under his supervision, in which he wrote that "from letters received through
our agents it seems that the Zelensky you have arrested was apparently searched by you in the spring or summer of this year.
Seeing that no reports have been forthcoming from you concerning
this matter, please notify us. whether this is the case, and, if so,
what was the reason for his being searched, and a·lso the results
of the search." So it appears that the chief of the Saratov Gendarmerie specially inquired about your case on August l 1,
1911. How do you explain this?
ZELENSKY: I myself am a native of Saratov, in Saratov
I was brought up for charges, then again I was connected with
certain Saratov Party men, was in correspondence with them.
and it is very possible that to the extent that my correspondence
with these people was under surveillance this might have interested the gendarmes.
VYSHINSKY: Irrespective of the fact that you were an
agent of the Okhrana?
ZELENSKY: Irrespective.
VYSHINSKY: And perhaps in this connection too?
ZELENSKY: I do not know.
VYSHINSKY: Were you aware that on September 4, 1911,
the chief of the Orenburg Provincial Gendarmerie Headquarters
inquired: "Please notify me what could have happened
to Zelensky recently." The chief of the Samara Provincial Gendarmerie Headquarters did the same thing. So it seems that three
gendarmerie headquarters were taking an interest in you: the
Samara gendarmerie, where you were recruited in July 1911,
then the Saratov gendarmerie-on August 11, 1911, and lastly
the Orenburg Gendarmerie Headquarters in the month of September.
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: It seems to be a rather wide periphery.
ZELENSKY: That was the periphery where I worked.
VYSHINSKY: "What could have happened to Zelensky
recently"-what does this mean?
ZELENSKY: I cannot give any explanations on the matter.
VYSHINSKY: You cannot? You yourself cannot give an
explanation for it? I have an explanation, but I would like to
hear you explain it.
ZELENSKY: I explain it in the following way. I worked in
Orenburg, I was arrested in Orenburg. In Orenburg I also had
conn~ctions and people with whom I was in contact. I think that
318

in so far as at the time of my arrest and prior to my arrest my
work in Saratov and in Orenburg was known to the authorities,.
the gendarmerie headquarters in these places, having received
notification of my arrest, would naturally be interested to know
if there was evidence in the possession of the Saratov Gendarmerie
Headquarters which could incriminate or expose anyone in
Orenburg or Saratov corresponding or otherwise connected with me.
VYSHINSKY: But look at the formulation. "Please notify
me what could have happened to Zelensky recently." This formulation is very definite: it seems to say-Zelensky is our man~
and you arrest him. What is the matter? What has happened to.
him? That is the only way to understand it. Or perhaps it could
be understood differently?
ZELENSKY: I can say the following . . . .
VYSHINSKY: Can it be understood in this way?
ZELENSKY: Yes, it can, but it can also be understood in
another way.
VYSHINSKY: In 1912 where were you imprisoned?
ZELENSKY: In Samara.
VYSHINSKY: You did not make any application to his.
,
honour the chief? . . .
ZELENSKY: I made an application asking to be summoned
for examination.
VYSHINSKY: For examination?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Not to elucidate certain questions?
ZI:;:LENSKY: I have already said that I asked to be summoned ...
VYSHINSKY: For examination?
ZELENSKY: Yes. That was written in my petition. I intended
to find out the reasons for my arrest.
VYSHINSKY: For a revolutionary the reason for his arrest
is quite naturally his revolutionary activity.. And you thought
they would tell you who had given you away?
ZELENSKY: No, not who had given me away.
VYSHINSKY: What did you want?
ZELENSKY: I made an application requesting to be summoned
for examination.
VYSHINSKY: But I think that was not what you wrote.
Allow me to read out your statement, you can dispute it afterwards.
ZELENSKY: Pardon me, allow me to say, _perhaps it is not
worth your wasting time.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to waste time and read it out.
"To His Honour Chief of the Samara Gendarrnerie Headquarters~
Petition. I have the honour to request you humbly to summon me
to headquarters, or to come to the Samara Province prison, fo
319

dear up the questions connected with my arrest, and also to allow
me to see my brother, Yakov Abramovich Zelensky." Was not
your brother an agent of the Gendarmerie Headquarters?
ZELENSKY: No, not this one, but another brother.
VYSH INS KY: What was his name?
ZELENSKY: Alexander.
VYSHINSKY: He was also an agent of the Gendarmerie
Headquarters?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Which one?
ZELENSKY: Also of Samara.
VYSHINSKY: Also of Samara?
ZELENSKY: Also of Samara.
VYSHINSKY: So you started a family business?
ZELENSKY: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: Do you know that in 1913 the Chief of Police
became interested in you, and why? His inquiry to the Samara
Provincial Gendarmerie Headquarters reads: "In view of need,
I ask you kindly to inform me where Isaac Abramovich Zelensky
has been exiled and for what term." That was you?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In July 1911 you are recruited as an agent of
the Samara Gendarmerie Headquarters; the Saratov Gendarmerie
Headquarters in August and the Orenburg Gendarmerie Headquarters in September inquire what could have happened to you.
Finally, in January 1913 a Chief of Police inquires.where you have
been exiled and fo~ what term. So they all seek contact with you
and are anxious to know what has happened to you. Is that so,
-0r not?
ZELENSKY (after a silence): I think ...
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, is this a fact?
ZELENSKY: Such are the facts.
VYSHINSKY: Were you acquainted with Polonko?
ZELENSKY: I was not acquainted; he was an agent, a
provocateur.
.
VYSHINSKY: What had you to do with him?
ZELENSKY: He was an agent of the Okhrana and I was
instructed to get in touch with the Okhrana through Polonko.
VYSHINSKY: I have no questions now. But I ask the Court
to verify this, to take Vol. LI of the present case, there you
will find a record made by the Acting Chief of the Gendarmerie
Headquarters, lstomin. This record of the Gendarmerie Headquarters says: "Polonko, Alexander Alexandrovich, druggist's
apprentice, railway employee ... "
ZELENSKY: I don't know his family tree.

320

VYSHINSKY: Not his !amity tree, but it ts a fact that
"Alexander Alexandrovich Polonko was a secret agent of the
Samara Province Gendarmerie Headquarters under the pseudonym
'Novikov.'" You knew his pseudonym-"Novikov"?
ZELENSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: And what was your pseudonym?
ZELENSKY: "Ochkasty."
VYSHINSKY: Why?
ZELENSKY: Evidently because I wore spectacles.
VYSHINSKY: No, I do not think that was the reason. And
what other pseudonym?
ZELENSKY: "Salaf."
VYSHINSKY: Why?
ZELENSKY: I don't know.
VYSHINSKY: According to a record of the same Gendarmerie
Headquarters, Polonko, in 1910, was receiving 40 rubles a month.
Payment was made on payroll No. 25 for the year 1910: 1 'September-October-60 rubles, November-December--40 rubles. • • . February-60 rubles, March-60 rubles, Apri 1-100 rubles." What
about you?
ZELENSKY: Also-25, 40, 50 and also 100.
VYSHINSKY: So you were being promoted parallel with Polonko?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: So we have documentary proof of Polonko.
Do you know Averbuch?
ZELENSKY: I don't know him personally, but that is the
name to which I was to address letters for the Okhrana from my
place of exile.
VYSHINSKY: From exile you sent letters care of Averbuch?
Who was Averbuch?
·
ZELENSKY: The proprietor of a printshop.
VYSHINSKY: And an Okhrana agent simultaneously?
ZELENSKY: Probably, yes.
VYSHINSKY: If you sent your letters from exile to his address,
and he was to pass them on to the Okhrana, he was probably an
agent of the Okhrana?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: I ask the Court to ascertain that in the same
v_olume, Vol. LI, on p. 24, there is a record of the examination
of Leib Moiseyevich Averbuch, who was arrested in December
1937. Is that the man?
ZELENSKY: I said that I do not know his name.
VYSHINSKY; "I do not know his name." But Averbuch is
Averbuch?
ZELENSKY: I think it is the .same .man.
21

321

-VYSHINSKY: And here is what Averbuch says in his testimony:
"Furthermore, my address was used by the Samara Gendarmerie
Headquarters and by agents of the Gendarmerie Headquarters,
even .those who were in exile. I remember that the reports of a
certain Isaac Abramovich, who was in exile, passed through me."
That was you?
ZELENSKY: I think so.
VYSHINSKY: "I passed his letters on to the Gendarmerie Headquarters." Question: "To whom personally did you give Isaac
Abramovich 's letters?" Answer: "I do not remember the person's
name." Question: "How many letters did you pass on?" Answer:
"Altogether between 1913 and 1916 I passed on four or five letters
to the Gendarmerie Headquarters."
ZELENSKY: I was not in Narym between 1913 and 1916.
VYSHINSKY: You are not the only one concerned, there
might have been letters from others. And, in so far as you are
concerned, is it a fact?
ZELENSKY: It is.
VYSHINSKY: Further on he says: "I do not know Isaac Abramovich by the surname of Zelensky. From the letters which I passed
on to the Gendarmerie Headquarters I knew an Isaac Abramovich,
whose surname I do not know, whose letters I received and passed
on to the Gendarmerie Headquarters." He himself received 50 rubles
a month, you received more. Do you confirm all this, accused
Zelensky?
ZELENSKY: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Please tell us whether there was an occasion
when the accused Yagoda called on you in 1924 and showed you
these photographs and fingerprints from the Gendarmerie Headquarters.
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY (to the President): May I ask the accused Yagoda?
THE PRESIDENT: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, do you confirm this fact?
YAGODA: Yes. This was his brother's dossier.
VYSHINSKY: This was his brother's dossier?
YAGODA: Yes, his brother had been arrested, Zelensky was
very perturbed. His brother was an agent-provocateur and was
shot in 1924.
VYSHINSKY: And you handed over this material to Zelensky?
Why?
YAGODA: I did not hand it over. Dzerzhinsky told me to
show the dossier to Zelensky. I told Zelensky to come over. At
that time he was Secretary of the Moscow Committee of the
Party. He did not come, but telephoned, asking me to come.
VYSHINSKY: Did you_go?

322

YAGODA: I did. I showed him the who1e dossier. Zelensky
was very perturbed and asked me to leave the dossier with him.
VYSHINSKY: And you left it?
·
YAGODA: No, I took it back.
VYSHINSKY: How is it that these dossiers were found in
his possession?
YA GODA: I do not remember.
ZELENSKY: He brought me my brother's dossier and my
own personal Samara records.
VYSHINSKY: These records?
ZELENSKY: Yes. I asked him to give me these two photographs.
VYSH INSKY: Two?
ZELENSKY: Two or as many as there were.
VYSHINSKY: One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight,
.nine photographs altogether.
ZELENSKY: But they are all on one card.
VYSHINSKY: One card, but nine photographs.
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSH INSKY: Now you may proceed with your epic.
ZELENSKY: But these photographs do not prove ... They
prove that I was detained for interrogation by the gendarmerie
on the charge of belonging to a Social-Democratic organization.
VYSH INSKY: Here it is important for me to establish the
accused Yagoda 's evidence that you were perturbed, that you
showed concern, and as a result of this concern and uneasiness,
nine photographs of this brother of yours, the agent-provocateur,
got into your possession.
ZELENSKY: Not my brother's, but my photographs. And
another print remained in the dossier.
VYSHINSKY: And this was left with you?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Who were you then?
ZELENSKY: Secretary of the Moscow Committee.
VYSHINSKY: Did you inform the Central Committee of the
Party about this fact then?
ZELENSKY: About my brother? Yes?
VYSHINSKY: No, about yourself.
ZELENSKY: No, I did not.
VYSH INS KY: So you concealed it all? Now continue.
ZELENSKY: So I escaped from exile; I took advantage .o! the
confidence placed in me by Party people, and went to Tsantsyn
with a commission to restore the Party organization there and ~un
the ·campaign in connection with the new elections to the sick
benefit societies. I worked in Tsaritsyn for from two to two and
a half months, was arrested and sent back to Narym. In Narym
I continued to conceal the crimes I had committed againstthe Party;
21*

323

I finished my term of exile, after which I continued to do Party
work and kept in touch with the Party organization. I worked near
Moscow-in Bogorodsk-in the power transmission plant, worked
in Sormovo, and in September 1915 was arrested again and exiled
to Verkholensk, Irkutsk Province, after more than eight months•
detention in jail. In Irkutsk I likewise continued to conceal my
complicity, my previous provocateur work, from my fellow exiles.
I escaped from exile in Irkutsk in December 1916. It was in the
city of Irkutsk, where I met my brother on my way from exile,
that I learnt that he had also been recruited by the Okhrana, and,
instead of exposing him, I suggested that he break off all connections with the Party organization. I don't know whether he did
so or not, because in February 1917 he was exposed, declared
art agent-provocateur, arrested and put on trial. This is, so to
speak, the first shameful epic of my criminal life. I became connected with the Rights at the end of 1928 or in 1929.
Before telling you the nature of my connection with the Rights,
I want to dwell on another anti-Party and criminal action of mine,
which the Party knew about, but which had not been sufficiently
elucidated.
I want to speak of the letter which I wrote to Kamenev from
Tashkent in the summer of 1924. I want to speak of this not for
the purpose of throwing light just on my own crimes, but because
it is of certain public interest and deals with certain matters that
throw light on the status of the Moscow organizations at that time
and on Kamenev's preparation for an attack on the Party as far
back as the summer of 1924. My letter was regarded as the letter
of a man resentful at being removed from a post. Actually, this
was not the case. The letter undoubtedly was of a factional nature.
The letter contained an anti-Party, anti-Leninist attempt to
contrast Lenin's line with Stalin's line. The letter is evidence that
even then there was the intention to organize an anti-Party struggle
against Stalin. The gist of the matter was as follows. Kamenev.
was doing everything to cultivate sentiments of "local interests
first," he was out to make the Moscow organization in actual fact
a patrimony.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you could be more brief with this,
Kamenev does not interest us now.
ZELENSKY: It is a. question of the situation and the tendencies
which might arise.
VYSHINSKY: We are not interested in the tendencies which
might arise; we are concerned with the facts establishing your criminal activities. You can say all the rest in your last plea; at present
the Court examination is in progress. So please give us the facts
concerning your cri mi na 1activity as a member of the Right and Trot324

skyite and anti-Soviet plot and bloc, You are going a long way
around.
ZELENSKY: That is what I am talking about.
THE PRESIDENT: Regarding this letter there is your testimony, which is of no particular interest to the open Court session,
and has no direct bearing on the case.
ZELENSKY: It has a bearing on the case in the sense that it
shows that in the summer of 1924 Kamenev was preparing to start
a struggle against the Central Committee of the Party.
VYSHINSKY: That is also known.
ZELENSKY: And I was an accomplice in this.
VYSHINSKY: Well, say so; you were Kamenev's accomplice
in his anti-Soviet struggle as far back as 1924.
ZELENSKY: At that time there was no anti-Soviet struggle
yet, it was in preparation.
VYSHINSKY: But to all intents and purposes this was a
struggle against the Party and against the Soviet state?
ZELENSKY: Now the question concerning my wrecking work,
I joined the Right organization at the end of 1928 or at the
beginning of 1929 for the reasons stated in the indictment, out
of fear that my criminal activity would be exposed.
VYSHINSKY: What criminal activity?
ZELENSKY: Provocateur activity,
VYSHINSKY: Well, say so.
ZELENSKY: I joined the Right organization not only for
this reason but because the line adopted by the Party at that
time, the offensive against the kulaks, the final liquidation of
the kulaks, the last exploiter class, had an especially violent effect
on me and precipitated me into the camp of counter-revolution.
I got in touch with Smirnov. I did so because I had been acquaint~
ed with him previously and was intimate with him, and because
<;ontact with him seemed the most convenient, since he held a high
Party post. I was recruited by A. P. Smirnov. When I arrived
from Tashkent I participated in a number of meetings of the
Rights which took place at Smirnov's home in the course of 1929-30.
A number of people took part in these meetings, whose
names I mentioned in my testimony and which I will make public
here with your permission.
VYSHINSKY: It is not important who took part in meetings
ten years ago. Were any of the accused there?
ZELENSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Did you take part in them?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Well, speak of yourself first of all.
ZELENSKY: At the meetings the line of the Party was sharply
criticized, and a line of struggle against the Central Committee

325:

of the Party was worked out. During one of the visits Smirnov
told me that the Rights had their centre, consisting of Bukharin, Rykov, Tomsky, Uglanov and himself, Smirnov.
Speaking of the centre's tactics in the period of 1929-30, I
must point out that Smirnov expressed strong dissatisfaction even
then. He considered that the line of the Rights-Bukharin's
and Tomsky's-was not sufficiently vigorous and resolute.
He demanded more vigorous moves, more vigorous actions in the
struggle to change the leadership. Even then he expressed the
opinion that a bloc with Kamenev and Zinoviev was essential.
In 1929-30 Smirnov gave me a number of instructions concerning the disruption of collectivization in Central Asia.
These instructions were as follows: everything must be done,
as Smirnov expressed himself, to preserve the big farms, meaning
kulak farms; everything must be done to check the development
of the collective movement, check and disrupt the organization
of collective farms. He said it was necessary to support the bourgeois-nationalist organization in its struggle against the Party.
1 transmitted these directions. As regards Central Asia, they consisted concretely in the fact that I submitted a plan of collectivization to the Central Committee of the Party considerably minimizing the actual possibilities and constituting a slowed-down
pace of development. The plan of collectivization which 1 submitted for the first five-year period provided for the possibility of
collectivizing 52 per cent of the peasant holdings. The Central
Committee rejected this plan and fixed the percentage of collectivization at 68 per cent.
Instead of organizing a struggle to carry out this plan by doing
everything to intensify organizational and economic work in the
collective farms and training cadres, on arriving in Tashkent
I issued the slogan "Overtake and surpass the foremost collectivized districts of the Soviet Union!" In line with this direction,
the local organizations worked out a plan of rapid collectivization and proceeded to organize collective farms by methods of
compulsion.
This method of disrupting the organization of cotlective farms
was seized upon by the national-chauvinist organizations, which
engineered a number of excesses. When discontent assumed considerable proportions and these gross mistakes in collectivization
could not be concealed from the Central Committee, I gave instructions that, instead of rectifying the mistakes, matters should
be so arranged that people would leave the collective farms and
nothing should be done to prevent it. Under this seemingly legal
formula a way was opened for kulak agitation and kulak activity
aimed at breaking up the collective farms. As a result of the exodus from the collective farms, the number of hous~lwtcts associa-

326

ted in collective farms, which had reached 55 per cent by the
end of 1930, was reduced. to 28 per cent, that is to say, 15 to
18 per cent dropped out of the collective farms. Besides
this. wrecking activity whic~ I carried on in the sphere of collect! ve farm development, I supported the Rights in the national . republics, including Faiz1:1lla Khodjayev in Uzbekistan·
Atabayev in Turkmenia, Khadjibayev in Tadjikistan, etc:
After I was removed from Tashkent and arrived in Moscow.
I continued to keep in touch with Smirnov, as a representative of
the centre of the Rights. At the end of- 1931 or the beginning
of 1932, Smirnov, in ·speaking of the failure of the tactics of
the Rights. to- disrupt collective. farm development, initiated -me
into the Ryutin platform. The Ryutin platform, as you know,
was a platform for the restoratiol\ of capitalism. Speaking of this
platform, Smirnov told me of the new tactics Which had been
outlined by the centre of the Rights, and which consisted in the
following: the use of double-dealing, a conspirative form of organizati<m, the adoption .of tactics. of wrecking, diversion, destruction, training insurrectionary .cadres', the. p.doption of terrorism.•..
Speaking of the· necessity for _concentrating our forces in the
struggle to remove the leadership of the Party and the country,
Smirnov, expressing the opinion of the centre, in which I also
concurred, considered_that any means were permissible, meaning
thereby struggle by means of insurrection and by means of
terrorism.
After Smirnov was exposed as a Right, I began to maintain
contact with Antipov, whom -I knew as an active participant in
the counter-revolutionary organization -of the Rights. From him I
received instructions to proceed more actively with wrecking work
in the co-operatives and in the Centrosoyuz. The object which
the organization of the Rights set itself in the wrecking work
in the sphere of trade consisted in the following: Antipov and all
the Rights attached special importance to the. disorganization of
those branches Qf economy which most immediately affected the
population: housing, co-operatives, tr~de, commodity circulation,
efc.
THE PRESIDENT: You are speaking 'Qf the. history of the
organization_ of the Rights. You had better tep ~s abou~ your
wrecking activities; as it .is, you are speaking llke a witness,
and saying nothing about yourself.
ZELENSKY: Every accused is at the same time a witness.
THE PRESIDENT: All right, but don't forget to speak of
your own wrecking activities.,

32-7

ZELENSKY: I am giving evidence as to the content of the
wrecking activities and the aims which the wrecking activities
pursued. I think it is important.
So, the purpose of the wrecking activities was to arouse dis·
content among the population with regard to the supply service,
discontent with the work of the organs of supply and trade, in
the given case the work of the co-operative bodies, and thereby
provoke discontent against the government, that is to say, it was
done with a manifest provocative intent.
How did I put these wrecking activities into practice? I recruited, both in the Centrosoyuz and in its branches .•.
THE PRESIDENT: You need not mention names.
ZELENSKY: All right. I recruited several officials. The content of the wrecking activities consisted in the following. The
Rights engineered interruptions in the supply of commodities
of everyday use to the trading organizations. Thus, for instance,
interruptions of this kind were engineered in the Kursk Region
in the first quarter of 1936, in the sugar supply. Many shops
were out of sugar for two or three weeks. Similar interruptions
were engineered in the Leningrad Region in the makhorka-supply;
there were similar interruptions in the summer of 1936 in the
bread trade in a number of rural districts of the Byelorussian
S.S.R. situated near the frontier.
To give you some idea of the character of these interruptions,
I will point out the following: out of 30,000 shops inspected
by the co-operative trade sections of the Soviets and by trade
inspectors, there was no salt in 3, 700 shops in the first quarter
of 1936. Out of 42,000 shops, 2,000 shops had no sugar on sale.
In the third quarter of 1936, 1,600 shops ollt of 36,000 had no
makhorka, so that these were not isolated cases, but rather
widespread.
The Rights did nothing to combat short measure, short weight
and overcharging the public. What is more~ they furthered this
criminal business ....
THE PRESIDENT: Speak about yourself, not about them.
ZELENSKY: All right. This was done in the following way.
VYSHINSKY: You are referring to overcharging?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And how did matters stand with regard to butter, thanks to your criminal activity?
_ZELENSKY: I am coming to that. I intend to speak of it.
VYSHINSKY: How matters stood with butter, this is of
interest to me at this stage of the investigation. You have spoken
of salt, of sugar, how you held back these commodities from sal~
328

to the population by sabotage, etc. But how did matters stand
with butter?
ZELENSKY: We don't sell butter in the rural districts.
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you what you sell. You were
above all selling the main thing-your country. I am speaking about
what measures were taken by your organization to disrupt trade
and deprive the population of prime necessities. Apart from sugar
and salt, do you know anything concerning butter?
ZELENSKY: I told you that the co-operatives do not sell
butter in the rural districts.
VYSHINSKY: You are not a co-operator, you are a member
of a conspiratorial organization. Do you know anything about
butter?
ZELENSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: For itlstance, that you did not supply cheap
grades of butter?
ZELENSKY: That is ai;rother matter altogether.
VYSHINSKY: What do you mean, another matter?
ZELENSKY: I can expla_in this to you now. I want to tell
you what bore relation ...
VYSHINSKY: No, you .are dividing your activities into two
parts: your activity as a co-operator and your activity as a conspirator. But I want you to speak here not as a co-operator,
but as a conspirator.
ZELENSKY: Quite true, but might I be allowed some continuity in my account?
VYSHINSKY: You are not delivering .a report here.
ZELENSKY: But in respect of the account of my criminal
activity there must be some continuity?
VYSHINSKY: Continuity in my opinion consists in answers
being given to the questions that are put to you by the Court
investigation, and I am asking you: have you any knowledge of
criminal operations with regard to supplying the population with
butter, particularly cheap grades of butter, or not? Operations
which were effected on the orders of your ''bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"; are they known to you or not?
ZELENSKY: Yes, they are.
.
VYSHINSKY: In what did they consist?
ZELENSKY: They consisted in the following: in making
butter, all the produce-purchasing organizations used the international standards fixing quality of butter.
VYSHINSKY: That is n-0t t-he point.
ZELENSKY: That is the point.
VYSHINSKY: No.
ZELENSKY: What do you mean? This was done ...
G29

THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zelensky, no cross-talk and keep
to the point.

VYSHINSKY: You want to explain the technicalities of this
business and I want to get to the bottom of this business. You
said at the preliminary investigation that the destructive character of your work consisted in the following: the adopted scale
of grades of butter had the result that there was only butter of
the highest grade, no cheap butter reached the market.
ZELENSKY: That is what I just wanted to explain.
VYSHINSKY: Is it a fact, or not?
ZELENSKY: It is.
VYSH INSKY: Further. This affected the budget of the consumer. ls that so, or not?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did this rouse satisfaction or dissatisfaction on
the part of the public?
ZELENSKY: Dissatisfaction.
VYSHINSKY: Is this what you were striving for?
ZELENSKY: It was.
VYSH INS KY: md your organization strive for it?
ZELENSKY: It did.
VYSHINSKY: And was the butter which was issued for sale
always of good quality, or did you try to spoil its quality too?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Were there cases when members of your organization connected with the butter business threw glass into the
butter?
ZELENSKY: There were cases when glass was found in butter.
VYSH INS KY: Glass was not "found," but thrown into the butter.
You understand the difference: thrown into the butter. Were
there such cases, or not?
ZELENSKY: There were cases when glass was thrown into the
butter.
VYSHINSKY: Were there cases when your accomplices, fellow participators in the criminal plot against the Soviet power
and the Soviet people, threw nails into the butter?
ZELENSKY: There were.
VYSHINSKY: For what purpose? To make it "tastier"?
ZELENSKY: That is clear.
VYSHINSKY: Well, that is organizing wrecking and diversive activities. Do you admit that you are guilty of this?
ZELENSKY: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Yet you say: "We did not engage in this, it
is not a co-operative matter."
Are you a member of the conspiratorial "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites"?
330

ZELENSKY: I am.
VYSH lNSKY: Oid you take part in the wrecking, diversive,
terrorist and espionage work of this bloc?
ZELENSKY: I did take part in wrecking and diversive work.
VYSH IN SKY: About espionage work you so far say nothing?
ZELENSKY: (No reply.)
VYSH INSKY: Do you answer for all the criminal activities
of the bloc?
ZELENSKY: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Including diversive activities?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: For the nails, for the glass in the butter,
which hacked the throats and stomachs of our people?
ZELENSKY: I answer for it. May I continue?
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
ZELENSKY: I was telling about the wrecking activities with
regard to short measure, short weight and overcharging, which
were made possible owing to the fact that the local wholesale
organizations had no price lists.
VYSHINSKY: You are again talking about overcharging. But
what about eggs?
ZELENSKY: In that case, please establish the order of interrogation.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zelensky, when you make your
speech in defence or your last plea,· nobody wi 11 interrupt you.
But now, when questions are put to the accused, be good enough
to answer.
ZELENSKY: I am answering all the questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zelensky, the Procurator of the
U.S.S.R. is questioning you. You may answer or not; you may
say nothing at all and take your seat. But if you-are put questions,
be good enough to answer.
VYSHINSKY: You are talking about overcharging, but I am
interested in questions which are closer to butter. I want first
to speak about eggs, and then about overcharging. Did you take
the same sort of measures as in the case of butter with regard
to the supply of eggs to the public? That is another question that interests the public. For example, was there a case, or
cases, when periodical attempts were made to leave Moscow without
eggs. Were there such cases?
ZELENSKY: Yes, there were.
VYSHINSKY: Was there a case in 1936 when Moscow was
left without eggs through your fault, through the fault not
of you personally, but of one of the active participators in this
~onspiratorial bloc?
ZELENSKY: There was.
331

YYSHINSKY: Do you remember when this made itself most
acute Iy felt?
- ZELENSKY: I cannot reca 11 the month just now, but I can
menti-0n the following fact. In 1936 fifty carloads of eggs were
allowed to spoil, from wrecking motives.
VYSHINSKY: Fifty carloads of eggs? Where was this, in
Moscow?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Deliberately?
ZELENSKY: I presume so.
VYSHINSKY: You only presume so? But who did this? I am
not asking for the name, but who in relation to your organization?
ZELENSKY: It was done by a man whom I had placed in
charge of this organization, Kulinovsky, manager of the egg and
poultry department, and by the manager of the Moscow office,
whom I had not recruited, but who I presume was a member of
the organization.
VYSHINSKY: But they performed this operation with your
knowledge?
ZELENSKY: No, I learnt about it later.
VYSHINSKY: So it was on their own initiative?
ZELENSKY: Apparently.
VYSHINSKY: Were there not instructions to wreck wherever
possible?
ZELENSKY: There were.
VYSHINSKY: And they, being placed in charge of the egg
business, did wrecking work on this job? Was this with your
knowledge?
ZELENSKY: Yes, this was with my knowledge.
VYSHINSKY: Can this be called on their own initiative?
ZELENSKY: No, it was on my responsibility.
VYSHINSKY: As a member ...
ZELENSKY: Of a counter-revolutionary organization.
VYSHINSKY: And who were you at that time?
ZELENSKY: The chairman of the Centrosoyuz.
VYSHINSKY: That means that it was your duty to supply
the population with foodstuffs?
ZELENSKY: Yes ..
VYSHINSKY: And that is the· way you supplied the population with foodstuffs. And did you not mix nails with the eggs?
ZELENSKY: No.
VYSHINSKY: Why? It did not work? The shells interfered?
Now you may continue.
ZELENSKY: I consider overcharging, short measure and
short weight to be wrecking in no less a degree.
VYSHINSKY: Yes, that is a serious matter.
3~~

ZELENSKY: And I want to divulge the mechanism of this
matter.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us first what it consisted in and then
you can go on to the mechanism.
ZELENSKY: It seems to me thatthe questionofovercharging,
short measure and short weight should be clear to everybody;
it is very obvious. It consists in the following: when a man comes
into a shop to make a purchase, he is overcharged, given short
measure and short weight, that is, he is named a price higher
than the one at which the goods should be sold, or is given shorter weight than he is entitled to, or is sold goods not of the proper quality.
·
VYSHINSKY: Why is this done?
ZELENSKY: To arouse discontent among the population.
VYSHINSKY: That is, with provocative purposes?
ZELENSKY: Of course. The mechanism of this business consists in the fact that the wholesale organizations have no price
lists.
And so the auditing organizations and the consumers themselves
are unable to verify the prices charged. Prices are fixed by the
trading organizations or by the salesmen in the shops very often
at their own discretion, that is, without control. And so it is
almost impossible to detect a man who overcharges the consumer.
This matter assumed a serious and widespread character. To give
some idea of the extent of this wrecking work, I may mention that
of 135,000 shops th~t were inspected by the Co-operative Tnide
Inspectorate, cases of overcharging and defrauding purchasers were
established in 13,000 shops. The actual number was considerably
larger.
Another important form of wrecking, also designed to arouse
the discontent of the population, was the freezing of trade by
despatching goods to the wrong districts or at the wrong times.
For example, there were cases when summer goods were sent in
winter, and, vice versa, when winter goods arrived in the shops
in summer.
VYSHINSKY: That is, the public was offered felt boots in
summer and summer shoes in winter?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Was this your plan?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Was this accidental, or was it a plan and
a system?
ZELENSKY: Seeing that it was wrecking work, there can be
no question of its having been accidental.
VYSHINSKY: Hence it was done deliberately, on your instructions?
333

ZELENSKV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: With the same provocative purposes?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What dimensions did this wrecking work assume?
ZELENSKY: The total dimensions assumed by this economic
wrecking were as follows: as a rule, any particular stocks of goods
in the trading system were I or 1.5 per cent in excess, which
totalled 100,000,000-150,000,000 rubles ....
Actually, the amount of frozen trade was much larger, because
in certain regions-in West Siberia, for example, the Kursk
Region and Saratov-the actual stocks of goods exceeded the plan
by an 8 to 10 days' supply, and so on. I must mention one other
method of wrecking, in the shipping and the freezing of goods. In
the last quarter of 1936, the goods required for grain purchasing were
determined. Goods _were sent to all the regions in which grain
was to be purchased, but it was found that in the Tatar and
Bashkir Republics and other places grain purchasing was not
proceeding satisfactorily. However, the goods reserved for the
grain-purchasing fund were kept there for five or six months,
and only after the lapse of this period was the question raised of
taking them off the reserve. The public saw the goods in the shops
and was unable to purchase them, which in its turn aroused
acute dissatisfaction among the population.
I must deal with one other important question, namely the
encouragement of embezzlement and theft.
THE PRESIDENT: More briefly, please.
ZELENSKY: The assistance I gave to embezzlement and
theft took two forms. I gave directions to draw up wrecking instructions governing accountancy. The wrecking feature here
was that I sanctioned group entries of trade operations on what
was called the group system, which diminished the opportunities
for control. Furthermore, I drastically curtailed bookkeeping
and preserved a fairly high degree of diary accounting, which
considerably diminished the opportunities for controlling outstanding advances.
I deliberately hampered the work of the auditing commissions of the rural consumers' societies. It is impossible to combat
embezzlement and theft without the work of the auditing commissions and without the organization of public control. I deliberately
refrained from taking measures to organize this work. I should
also mention that we took measures to disrupt the records of the
shareholders and the records of share capital contributed, which
hampered the enlistment of shareholders in the management of
co-operative affairs. These are the chief forms and branches of
334

work that were embraced by the wrecking activities which I organized and for which I bear full responsibility.
I want to say the following. We wreckers could carry on our
work on such a broad scale only because we had confederates.
Our confederates in trade were the wrecking organizations in
the People's Commissariat of l nternal Trade and the State Planning Commission. Our confederates were those who should have
audited and controlled, that is, Antipov, yet he was the man from
whom I directly received instructions on wrecking activities.
But I would like to mention two other confederates. They
are the following: in our wrecking activities we took advantage
of inter-departmental friction and bureaucratic red-tape of all
kinds in the Soviet organizations. This enabled us to mask our
wrecking work; and wrecking work was made possible by the
existence of such a confederate as the opportunist, tolerant and
philistine attitude of many Communists and non-Party people,
who were tolerant towards all manifestations of petty wrecking,
as though they were trifling defects of an objective character.
Measures were taken along the lines of the People's Commissariat
of Internal Affairs to eradicate wrecking activities. But while
wreckers like myself can be eradicated by arrest, such confederates cannot be eliminated by the organs of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, but matters must be so organized . . .
THE PRESIDENT: We shall manage without your help.
ZELENSKY: I must deal with one other question. The Rights
attributed great importance to the utilization of the co-operative
apparatus for anti-Soviet purposes. I had instructions, and I pursued the aim of contaminating the apparatus with alien, hostile,
anti-Soviet and insurrectionary elements. How contaminated
the apparatus of the Centrosoyuz was may be judged from the
fact that when I was in charge of it about 15 per cent of the staff
of the Centrosoyuz consisted of former Mensheviks, SocialistRevolutionaries, anarchists, Trotskyites, etc. In certain regions
the number of alien· elements, former members of other parties,
Kolchak officers, and so on-as, for example, in the Krasnoyarsk
Territory, Irkutsk and West Siberia-was considerably higher.
l gave instructions that these people should not be expelled
from the apparatus, having in mind that, in view of the wide
ramification of the apparatus of the co-operative societies in the
rural districts, these people might always act as a centre of
attraction for all kinds of anti-Soviet elements and act as the
organizers of all kinds of insurrectionary groups and bands.
The Rights also intended to utilize the co-operatives at the
forthcoming elections to the Supreme Soviet. But we managed
to do nothing here, because arrest intervened. The Rights intended to

335

utilize the rural apparatus for the nomination of their candidates
first and foremost to the local co-operative bodies.
VYSHINSKY: Did you conduct secret counter-revolutionary
work while you were in Central Asia?
ZELENSKY: While I was in Central Asia I carried on the
work of which I have spoken. I worked to frustrate collectivization.
VYSHINSKY: Did you carry on undermining, counter-revolutionary work there?
ZELENSKY: I worked to frustrate collectivization, which
was counter-revolutionary, undermining work.
VYSHINSKY: And so you did conduct undermining, counter-revolutionary work. Do I understand you rightly?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Then you came to Moscow? In what year was
that?
ZELENSKY: In 1931.
VYSHINSKY: After this, did you break off connections
with your accomplices in Central Asia?
ZELENSKY: I did not form any organization in Central
Asia.
VYSHINSKY: I am not talking about an organization, I arn
t.alking about your connections. Did you break off connections?
ZELENSKY: I did.
VYSHINSKY: And while in Moscow, did you take part in
illegal meetings together with Ikramov?
ZELENSKY: I attended an illegal meeting with Ikramov
at Smirnov's place somewhere in 1929 or 1930.
VYSHINSKY: And who invited Ikramov there? Do you
remember?
ZELENSKY: It may have been I.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to question the accused Ikramov.
Accused Ikramov, do S'ou recall bow it was you attended
illegal meetings in 1929 or 1930?
IKRAMOV: Whether legal or illegal, I cannot say now, but
there was a meeting at Smirnov's place to which Zelensky invited
.me. All the Rights were present at this meeting.
VYSHINSKY: Who invited you?
IKRAMOV: I was there twice; once I was invited by Zelensky,
and the other time by Antipov.
VYSHINSKY (to Ikramov): Were you invited by Zelensky?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did he take you there?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did he put you in contact?
IKRAMOV: No. .
.
...

336

1

VYSH IN SKY: But what?
IKRAMOV: I do not know why it was, but there was no open
anti-Soviet talk; the talk was in hints.
VYSHINSKY: And did not some of those present at this
meeting express sharp opposition to the policy of the Soviet
power?
IKRAMOV: I wanted to speak about that in my testimony.
VYSHINSKY: Were there such utterances?
IKRAMOV: There were.
VYSHINSKY: There were. Why, then, do you say that there
were not?
IKRAMOV: There were hints.
VYSHINSKY: But fairly broad hints. For instance, were
not direct calumnies uttered at this meeting against Kirov?
IKRAMOV: There were.
VYSHINSKY: Were they hints or calumnies?
IKRAMOV: Open calumnies.
VYSHINSKY: Anti-Soviet calumnies?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And was Zelensky there?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Zelensky, is that true?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: You did not say anything about your
anti-Soviet connections abroad. Tell us in a few words how you
attempted to utilize certain personal connections abroad for antiSoviet purposes.
ZELENSKY: I utilized the foreign bureau of the Centrosoyuz
for the purpose of circulating tendentious and false information
about the state of the co-operative movement and its relations
with the Soviet government. Stressing the independent char. acter of the co-operative movement, and exaggerating its economic and political significance, I endeavoured to say . . ,
VYSHINSKY: You tell us plainly: did you, while chairman
of the Centrosoyuz, utilize your position in the apparatus, in
which there was a foreign bureau, for anti-Soviet, counterrevolutionary activities abroad?
ZELENSKY: I think that the circulation of tendentious ...
VYSHINSKY: Tendentious, provocative information with an
anti-Soviet bias. Is that anti-Soviet activity?
ZELENSKY: All the bulletins were carefully censored.
THE PRESIDENT: We are not speaking of official communications.
ZELENSKY: There were no others.
VYSH INSKY: There was tendentiousness?
337
22

ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: It passed the censorship, yet remained?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You managed to utilize legal opportunities
for illegal ends?
ZELENSKY: (No reply.)
THE PRESIDENT: Did you attempt to come to an arrangement with British circles about possible assistance in the event
of an uprising against the Soviet power?
ZELENSKY: I gave testimony on this point to the Procurator.
THE PRESIDENT: Your testimony contains the phrase:
"To come to an understanding with these leaders for possible
assistance in the event of an uprising against the Soviet power."
Do you confirm this, or not?
ZELENSKY: I do.
THE PRESIDENT: How did you endeavour to utilize this?
ZELENSKY: At a meeting with a certain Alexander . . .
THE PRESIDENT: Who is this Alexander?
ZELENSKY: The leader of the British Co-operative Party,
which is affiliated to the Labour Party. When he was passing
through here, I asked him what the attitude of the British cooperators would be if the Rights were to come to power in the
Soviet Union; what assistance they could give to a government
of Rights.
THE PRESIDENT: Did Alexander promise assistance, or
did he refrain from replying?
.
ZELENSKY: Alexander said that he would welcome a Right
government. As to help, he said that the British co-operators
could at any rate guarantee such credits and such assistance as
was granted to the Soviet government during the time of the
embargo.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you any other questions, Comrade
Procurator?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment until six o'clock.,
[Signed]

V. ULRICH

PRESIDENT:

Army Military JurisU
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER

Military Jurist First Rank

338

EVENING SESSION, MARCH 5, 1938

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Ikramov, do you corroborate the testimony which you
gave at the preliminary investigation?
IKRAMOV: I corroborate it in full.
THE PRESIDENT: Tell us briefly about your anti-Soviet
activities.
IKRAMOV: I began my anti-Soviet activities in 1928. True,
as early as September 1918 I joined a legal youth organization
of a nationalist type. I joined the Trotskyite opposition in 1923.
In 1928 I was in fact one of the leaders of the counterrevolutionary nationalist organization, which was, in essence, a
national-fascist organization. This organization was called "MilliIstiklal, '' which means "national independence.'' This name
speaks for itself. What other independence could these people
expect when there was Soviet power, what other kind of
independence except bourgeois restorationist independence? I was
a member of this organization. We fought for bourgeois independence. Yesterday I spoke about direct guidance. Direct
guidance consists in the following: at that time we could not
undertake any important concrete action, we had to gather forces,
train cadres; for this purpose it was necessary to accept into the
higher educational institutions people who would later on become
our loyal cadres, that is to say, we recruited young people from
an environment which was socially alien to Soviet power. In training these people, we figured that through them. we would be able
to get hold of the Soviet and Party apparatus, so that at the necessary moment we might effect a coup with the help of these
forces. At that time these two tasks were the immediate tasks
which we set ourselves, and there were no others. It can probably be seen from the material which I furnished during the preliminary investigation, both in the People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs and in the Procurator ·s Office, that at the time
this organization was formed, and for two or three years after,
it was not the kind of organization which it is today; because as,
on the one hand, the Soviet power was growing stronger, and,
339
22*

on the other hand, the cadres of this nationalist counter-revolutionary organization were growing in numbers, new elements
of struggle against the Soviet power appeared in the activities
of this org-anization.
In 1930, in connection with the murder of Abid Saidov by a
group of young people belonging to this organization, a number
of people were arrested, about seven or eight. I learnt about this
in Kislovodsk. When I came to Moscow I went to the 0.G.P.U.
and found out the reasons for their arrest. Kaul or Kaval-I do
not remember which-and Sobolev told me about the murder and
the arrest. Then I told myself that the arrest was a thing which
could not be undone and that now it was necessary to protect
the people who still remained.
How could we protect them? Simply to say that those arrested
were not guilty would be ridiculous, that would be no way of
protecting them. Therefore we took the line of double-dealing,
that is to say, Karimov, Rakhimi and myself came out in the
Party organization with speeches denouncing these people. In
this way we succeeded in pres~rving the remaining cadres.
However, I did not confine myself to this, and in 1932 (perhaps
I am not sure about the year, is it of any importance?) I began to
intercede on behalf of some of the arrested people of this groupRamzi, Kachimbek, Nazirov and others, asking for their release.
VYSHINSKY: And what about Batu?
IKRAMOV: I did not intercede in behalf of this immediate
perpetrator of the murder; I was somewhat angry with him because
he took the road of terrorism at a time when it was not necessary
to do so, and this was a blow to our organization. It was my opinion that by his acts he was cutting the branch on which we were
sitting. That is what I thought of his conduct. I succeeded in
bringing about the release of Ramzi.
VYSHINSKY: Did Ramzi commit this murder together with
Batu?
IKRAMOV: No, he did not take part in the murder, because
he was not in Uzbekistan.
VYSHINSKY: And did Batu take part in it?
IKRAMOV: I spoke about this yesterday. I can only speak
on the basis of the official record.
VYSHINSKY: But at that time Ramzi was exposed as a
member of your organization, was he not?
IKRAMOV: I do not remember. Kachimbek and Nazirov
were exposed.
VYSHINSKY: And did Nazirov take part in the murder?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: And who of them di,d take part in the murder?
IKRAMOV: I can only say what is in the official records.
340

Of those who participated in this murder I remember Batu
Saidov . . .
'
VYSHINSKY: Is that Nasyr Saidov?
IKRAMOV: Yes, Nasyr Saidov. I think Sadyr Kadyrov also
took part in the murder. I do not remember the others.
VYSH I NSKY: Were they all members of this organization?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Of which you were also a member?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And did you intercede in their behalf with
the consent of the other members of the organization?
IKRAMOV: I must say that I no longer asked the opinion of
the others on questions referring to wrecking activities in the
interests of our organization. You know, Citizen Procurator,
and you yourself realize that my crime is so much the graver
because, as former Secretary of the Central Committee of Uzbekistan, I enjoyed the great confidence of the leadership of the
Party and the Soviet government. I took advantage of this and
acted independently.
VYSHINSKY: Did you discuss with other members of your
organization, with Karimov, Shir-Mukhamedov and others, the
questions of terrorism, of tactics, and so forth?
IKRAMOV: When I saw that the organization was falling
to pieces, I summoned Karimov and Shir-Mukhamedov and told
them that we must gather our forces and take resolute action,
that it was necessary to do real work.
VYSHINSKY: And about terrorism?
IKRAMOV: In this connection we discussed the question of
terrorism and agreed that for the time being terrorism would
do us no good whatever.
VYSHINSKY: For the time being?
IKRAMOV: It would do us no good whatever. For the time
being it was necessary for us to have a program of gathering forces,
the more so since Abid Saidov had not exposed a single member
of our organization and, on the contrary, had praised Ikramov
at the Court trial.. And it was he whom the "Milli-Ittikhadists"
had to kill. I was terribly: disgusted with this conduct in regard
to Abid Saidov. We decided then not to engage in terrorism, but to
gather forces and not to go beyond the program which I have
explained.
:
VYSHINSKY: Does it mean that you decided not to engage
in terrorism for tactical reasons or as a matter of principle?
IKRAMOV: Both as a matter of principle and for tactical
reasons. The principle was that we would never achieve ·our goal
by means of individual terrorist acts.
VYSHINSKY; And )low did you intend to act?
341

IKRAMOV: .There I spoke plainly. Here I deliberately did
not want to speak. I said that it was necessary to employ the Bolshevik tactics of winning the masses.
VYSHINSKY: The masses? You wanted to win the masses?
But it was exactly the masses that you did not succeed in
winning.
IKRAMOV: I would ask you to please take pity on my Russian language. I shall explain first, so that you should put your
questions later, as you did in the case of Sharangovich.
VYSHINSKY: I shall try not to interfere with your explanations, but, on the contrary, only to be helpful. What interests
me is the following: this general question of terrorism is one thing,
but what about the things that Abid Saidov did, about the question of whether methods of terrorism should or should not be applied
to local people who opposed your organization? How was this
question settled?
IKRAMOV: With regard to terrorism-that it was in no case
permissible.
VYSHINSKY: You said, "for the time being." At that time
you thought it would do you no good. Hence it was for tactical
considerations?
IKRAMOV: No, it was also for considerations of principle.
VYSHINSKY: That it was doing no good?
IKRAMOV: Yes, that it was doing no good and was only preventing us from achieving our aim.
VYSHINSKY: Which aim?
IKRAMOV: We may kill one, but the Soviet power is strong
and would find us all out.
VYSHINSKY: Well, that is what I say, these are tactical
considerations.
IKRAMOV: And considerations of principle. We wanted to win
the people.
VYSHINSKY: You had one principle-not to be smashed.
IKRAMOV: No, in addition we also wanted to win the
masses.
VYSHINSKY: Did you succeed in that?
IKRAMOV: I also want to tell ..•
VYSHINSKY: No, you had better answer the question first:
did you succeed in winning the masses?
IKRAMOV: No, we did not succeed.
VYSHINSKY: And you will never succeed.
IKRAMOV: And praised be god if we never succeed.
VYSHINSKY: And what measures did. you mean to adopt in
order to protect yourself from those honest citizens who were
exposing you? Why was Abid Saidov murdered?
IKRAMOV: Abid Saidov was a dishonest person, and I am
342

convinced that he would have landed in jail or made his getaway.
He had once been an organizer of the Basmachi movement.
VYSHINSKY: He might have been in prison-that is your
opinion. But you are there already. So do not tell us that he was
dishonest. Why was he murdered?
IKRAMOV: I can state only what the official record says.
VYSHINSKY: What do you know from the official record,
why was Abid Saidov killed?
IKRAMOV: Because he denounced the "Milli-Istiklal."
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, your counter-revolutionary organization?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Hence he acted as an honest citizen?
IKRAMOV: Possibly.
VYSHINSKY: What do you mean-"possibly"? I think that
he acted as an honest man in denouncing a counter-revolutionary
organization. He died for that, did he not?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: He died for the Soviet power?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: So how dare you say that he was a dishonest
person?
IKRAMOV: He had been one of the organizers of the Basmachi
movement.
VYSHINSKY: It is one thing who he had been. But the question is what he became. He became a man who exposed you.
·
IKRAMOV: No, not us.
VYSHINSKY: Did he expose the counter-revolutionary organization?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: But you were also a member of the counterrevolutionary organization?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, he exposed you.
Now I am asking you, did you discuss the measures to take
to prevent your organization from being exposed? What did you
decide with regard to this?
. IKRAMOV: We discussed this question and adopted the following decision: to persecute such people as bad people; and to
fire them from the places where they worked so that they would
not be in our way.
VYSHINSKY: To declare that these people were anti-Soviet,
perhaps nationalists, persecute them-in short, to resort to every
kind of provocative means. Is that so?
IKRAMOV: It is.
VYSHINSKY: Is that honest?
343

IKRAMOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: So now I amreminding you what you said with
regard to Abid Saidov-that he was a dishonest person. By this
manoeuvre you were really trying to hide your real face. Were
those your tactics?
IKRAMOV: Yes, that is right.
VYSHINSKY: And in this way you wanted to gather your
cadres?
iKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Proceed.
IKRAMOV: As the Soviet power was becoming stronger and the
class struggle more intense, new problems arose before us.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to put one more question. Perhaps
I am interfering with you a little, but I shall put one more question
to you and try not to interfere any more. I have the following
question to ask you: when did you adopt these provocative tactics?
IKRAMOV: In 1931.
VYSHINSKY: Did you discuss this question with your people?
Did you meet with them, did you give them instructions to
this effect?
IKRAMOV: Yes, this is what happened and I gave instructions
to this effect.
As the class struggle was becoming intensified, new questions
arose in Uzbekistan. One of them was the question of collectivization. Zelensky spoke here about his slogan "To overtake and
·surp,ass." This is correct. Such a slogan was given. I paraphrased
Zelensky's slogan and gave the following slogan: Uzbekistan is
a cotton district, an agricultural district, therefore we must not
lag behind the foremost districts of the Soviet Union with regard
to collectivization. As a result there were mass actions against the
collective farms in a number of districts.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, this slogan was a provocative
slogan?
IKRAMOV: Yes, it was a provocative slogan.
VYSHINSKY: What was the practical result of this provocative slogan of yours?
IKRAMOV: Mass actions against collectivization.
VYSHINSKY: And first of all it was a blow at the dekhkans.
IKRAMOV: This is true, it was a blow at the dekhkans. It
was also a blow at collectivization and meant the ruin of peasant
farms.
VYSHINSKY: But later the situation of the peasant farms
improved?
·
IKRAMOV: Yes, it improved.
VYSHINSKY: So this manoeuvre of yours was exposed?
IKRAMOV: It was foiled.
344

VYSHINSKY: It was foiled-that means your manoeuvre
was exposed. Proceed.
II.<RAMOV: Wit.h the ?bject of upsetting. the order of crop
rotation, we gave instructions that all the irrigated cultivated
lands should be sown to cotton. Thus we brought it about that
there was no fodder for the cattle and the dekhkans were not allowed to raise food crops and vegetables for themselves. I am referring to melons, watermelons, onions, carrots and other important
crops. All this aroused discontent among the dekhkans.
VYSHINSKY: And how did you utilize this discontent?
IKRAMOV: There was no chance for this discontent to grow
stronger. One yea~ we carried out our line, but the next year the
Party and the Soviet government came down upon us and corrected
the line.
Now I want to speak about the bloc between our nationalist
organization and the centre of the Rights. They wanted to enlist
me, to make me a participator in the organization of the Rights,
as early as 1931. That is why they invited me twice to come to
A. P. Smirnov's country house. This was before and during the
Sixteenth Congress of the Party.
VYSHINSKY: Who invited you the first time?
. IKRAMOV: The first time, I think, it was Smirnov who invited me, I cannot say exactly. I went to Zelensky, and he took
me to Smirnov. The second time it was Antipov who invited me.
VYSHINSKY: This morning you said that Zelensky invited
you.
IKRAMOV: I cannot say with certainty.
VYSHINSKY: Did you know where Smirnov's country house
was located?
IKRAMOV: I knew that his country house was in Serebryanny
Bor.
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking about now, but did you know
then?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did Zelensky know?
IKRAMOV: Perhaps he knew.
VYSHINSKY: Then who of you took whom?
IKRAMOV: He took me. At that stage I was not enlisted and
did not establish a bloc. Therefore I think that I should pass on
to the direct counter-revolutionary bloc connections with the
Rights which did exist. I established direct counter-revolutionary
connections with the Rights in 1933 in Tashkent. Bukharin came
to Central Asia for a rest. Up to that time I had not been on
any terms of friendship with him. He sent a telegram saying tha~ he
was coming for a rest. He came to me and stayed seven or eight
days in nty apartment. We went hunting together, we went to
345

the country house together, we spent all the time in each other's
company. During this time we established connections-organizational and political connections-with the Right counter-revolutionary organization and with the Right centre. Bukharin first
broached the subject of collectivization, of the collective farms,
saying that this was a wrong line. He repeated the old, well-known
Bukharin thesis of military-feudal exploitation of the peasantry.
VYSHINSKY: In 1933?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
He compared the collective farms with the corvee system.
Then he went on to discuss the question of industrialization,
he pressed this matter all the time.
VYSHINSKY: In what sense did he press this matter?
IKRAMOV: I dig not want to speak of this, because Bukharin's
conception is well-known. Bukharin further said that the Party
and the Soviet government were pursuing a wrong line, that industrialization was unnecessary, that industrialization was leading
to ruin.
VYSHINSKY: Industrialization leading to ruin?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
At the same time he said that he did not believe in Lenin's
thesis that the backward colonial countries could attain Socialism
with the assistance of the advanced proletariat, without going
through the stage of capitalism. Bukharin held the opinion that
neither was this possible in the republics such as those of Central
Asia, and that they would inevitably have to pass through the
stage of normal capitalist development.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, he proposed to restore capitalism in Uzbekistan?
IKRAMOV: Yes, exactly that. I agreed with him, that is how
he enrolled me. Bukharin asked me, "You agree?" "I agree."
"Will you work with us?" "I will," I said. And right then and
there I told him that I was a counter-revolutionary not
from today, that I was no novice, but a leader of a similar counterrevolutionary organization. I told him of my organization, and
we came to an understanding that we would act jointly, that the
political line was one, and that we must also establish one organizational line. Then he formulated our understanding in the following way: we have one aim-to overthrow the leadership of the
Party and the Soviet government and assume power ourselves
in order to achieve this goal.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say?
IKRAMOV: The restoration of capitalism.
VYSHINSKY: In its entirety?
IKRAMOV: Yes, not only in Uzbekistan but in the whole
Union as well. Then he said: "What are your tactics?" I said:
,345

"To gather forces and effect a counter-revolutionary coup."
The ultimate object was to wrest Uzbekistan away from the Soviet
Union: He s.aid that o~r methods were petty, that we were willing
to wait until the Soviet government would experience hard times
and then we would act. And he cited Turgenev's words to the
effect that a Russian waits for a miracle to happen, for the unexpected, that he places his hopes in god, that a Russian leaves matters
to chance. No, he said, it is better to act. We approve of your
work with regard to the severance of Uzbekistan. With regard to this question there was an understanding between the
Rights and the Ukrainian nationalists, the Byelorussian nationalists and the nationalists of other republics. He said, "other,"
but I did not ask which other. Thus politically we were fully in
accord. Then Bukharin set us a number of tasks. The first-wrecking
activities, the second-kulak insurrection. He linked these two
questions up, saying that unless we organized armed struggle we
could not achieve our goal. He said that it was necessary to organize
the kulaks, to take advantage of religious fanaticism, to enlist the
priests and thus create an insurrectionary organization. As for
wrecking activities, at first I did not quite get what he was
driving at. I was afraid that if we, the leaders, engaged in
wrecking activities ourselves, then tomorrow the people would say:
"Go to prison yourselves." He replied: "You are queer fellows if
you think that people will speak about what you are doing. In each
such case it is necessary to say that this is the line of the Soviet
government, and thus the Soviet government is to blame. This
will help to turn the people against the Soviet government. There
are few kulaks now, the priests are also few, but it is necessary
to organize the broad masses to follow their lead. But how are the
broad masses to be organized if everything goes well, if everything
is developing? It is necessary to arouse discontent with the object
of organizing insurrectionary groups among them.
I agreed. Further he said that the program of the Rights included the point about terrorism. He went on to cite the theses
which two months later became known as the Ryutin platform for
.the remo.val of the leadership of the Party.
VYSHINSKY: He told you about them as early as that?
IKRAMOV: Oh, yes. A month later I learnt about this platform officially.
,
VYSHINSKY: And you immediately recognized it?
IKRAMOV: It was the same program which Bukharin had explained to me verbally, and now I got it in written form. With
regard to terrorism he set us no immediate tasks. Then he pointed
out that it would be absolutely necessary to engage in diversionist
destructive activities. These were the tasks which he set us at that
time. I agreed, and said that we would get down to work. I shall
347

first enumerate all the points of the program, and then I will tell
how we acted.
VYSHINSKY: You are calling this the points of a program?
IKRAMOV: It was the program which served as a basis for our
actions.
VYSHINSKY: This is what he explained to you in 1933?
IKRAMOV: Yes. In August or September.
VYSHINSKY: During the few days that he spent with you as
your guest?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Is that all that Bukharin said and conveyed
to you?
IKRAMOV: This is all. Then there were other meetings and
other questions.
VYSHINSKY: Did that happen in other years?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: I want to question Bukharin. Did you meet
Ikramov in 1933?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I stayed with him for several days in 1933.
VYSHINSKY: So he is telling the truth?
BUKHARIN: Absolutely the truth.
VYSHINSKY: Did you discuss political subjects?
BUKHARIN: We did.
VYSHINSKY: Is Ikramov presenting them correctly?
BUKHARIN: In substance I spoke to him along the lines of
the Ryutin platform.
VYSHINSKY: So in substance he is presenting it correctly?
BUKHARIN: That depends on what you consider the substance.
· VYSHINSKY: Did you propose to him to join you in the struggle
against the Soviet government?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Further, did you speak to him about the methods
which should be applied in this struggle?
BUKHARIN: About the methods which were included in the
Ryutin platform. It also contained a vague allusion to terrorism.
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk to him about wrecking activities
as well?
BUKHARIN: No, I did not.
VYSHINSKY: So he is not telling the truth?
BUKHARIN: He has, apparently, confused things.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you spoke to him about this somewhat
later?
BUKHARIN: The fact of the matter is that during the confrontation Ikramov denied that he carried on any conversations of a
political nature. I made him confess .
.348

VYSHINSKY: It happens that one refuses to talk and later
overreaches himself.
BUKHARIN: And later wants to overreach himself.
VYSHINSKY:. That happens. That is why we are trying to
verify it.
BUKHARIN: I want to say that I do not deny that I gave
him all the directions, that I recruited him and that 1 was the first
to enroll him in the Right organization.
VYSHINSKY: You admit that? I am putting the question
to you: he is not overreaching, he is telling the truth, is he not?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You were the first to enroll him in the counterrevolutionary organization of the Rights, were you not?
BUKHARIN: I was.
VYSHINSKY: For struggle against the Soviet government?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You explained to him the points in the Ryutin
platform?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Do you deny that you spoke about wrecking
activities and acts of diversion on that occasion?
BUKHARIN: That was the first conversation . . . .
VYSHINSKY: Why do you not answer my question?
BUKHARIN: I am giving the reasons for my negative answer.
VYSHINSKY: It is not your reasons that I want.
BUKHARIN: My answer is in the negative.
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk to Ikramov about wrecking activities and acts of diversion in subsequent years?
BUKHARIN: No, I did not.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Ikramov, here Bukharin is accusing you
of trying to overreach yourself.
IKRAMOV: Before I was arrested I denied. Now I have no
intention of hiding behind Bukharin or "our leaders," but I must
say that we learnt from them. . . .
VYSHINSKY: What?
IKRAMOV: You are witness to the fact and you know for how
many days we denied, how many times my "leaders" denied this
at the Plenum of the Central Committee. Our arsenal is the same,
our methods of denial are the same.
VYSHINSKY (to Ikramov): Do you now -affirm that Bukharin
spoke to you about wrecking activities?
·
IKRAMOV: We had another conversation with him. This was in
1935,'· I do not remember the date. He was finding fault here with
somebody, because the dates and the month had been confused.
I can point out the circumstances that attended this conversation.
It was on Zubovsky Boulevard, in a new apartment block, on the
349

fourth or fifth floor. That was where we met. Besides ourselves,
there was my wife, his wife and some woman whom they called
Aunt Sonya. We had supper in the kitchen, and then Bukharin led
me into another room and there we had our conversation.
·
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): Was there an Aunt Sonya?
BUKHARIN: If you are interested in the matrimonial aspect,
then that is a different matter.
VYSHINSKY: I am askingyou: did you talk to him about
wrecking activities?
BUKHARIN: Your formulations are not quite clear, Citizen
Procurator, it is not quite clear what you want to ask.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, I am asking you whether you
recall these circumstances.
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did this meeting with lkramov in 1935 take
place?
BUKHARIN: It did.
VYSHINSKY: What was its purport?
BUKHARIN: I did not say a word to him about politics.
VYSHINSKY (to Ikramov): Is he telling the truth?
IKRAMOV: No, he is not.
VYSHINSKY. (to Bukharin): And what bound you and Ikramov? Was he a member of your organization?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I recruited him in 1933.
VYSHINSKY: And was he still a member of your organization
in 1935?
BUKHARIN: I think so.
VYSHINSKY: And why do you think so if you did not discuss
this subject with him?
BUKHARIN: I know that Ikramov is a sufficiently serious
man, and if he undertook a definite obligation, if he agreed to
a whole series of directions, he would not retreat. The most essential thing which Ikramov did not mention in his evidence today
was a certain conversation. Here it appears that I came from Moscow .and said that Lenin's thesis on non-capitalist evolution was
wrong, and so let us establish capitalism in Uzbekistan. I am not
that stupid, I could not argue the way lkramov has testified here.
The conversation began . . .
VYSHINSKY: I am not interested in what the conversation
began with, I am asking you, was there a meeting on the fourth
floor in 1935?
BUKHARIN: I answered, Citizen Procurator, that during that
meeting there was not a word spoken about politics.
VYSHINSKY: What did you talk about?
BUKHARIN: About tea, about the weather, about what the
350

weather was in Turkestan; but we did not discuss politics. Why did
we not discuss them? Because ...
VYSHINSKY: Because you assume that, in 1935, when you
talked about the weather in Turkestan and Uzbekistan, Ikramov
was still a member of your counter-revolutionary organization.
BUKHARIN: During the first conversation Ikramov was in a
highly emotional state. He was bitter against the leadership of
the Party in connection with events which had taken place in
Kazakhstan.
VYSHINSKY: Was that in 1933?
· BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And in 1935?
BUKHARIN: I say that in 1935 I had no such conversation with
him, but I did load him with a charge of this kind in 1933. I formed
the conviction that he was so strongly attached to the anti-Party
and counter-revolutionary organization that he would necessarily
continue in this state.
VYSHINSKY: And you, the leader of an underground organization, met a member of your organization, one whom you enlisted,
met him two years later, and did not try to verify whether he still
adhered to the positions of your counter-revolutionary organization, you showed no interest in this, but began to discuss the weather
in Uzbekistan. Is this how it was, or not?
·
BUKHARIN: No, this is not how it was. You are putting a
question which contains in itself an ironical reply. As it happened,
I figured that I would meet Ikramov again, but by chance this
meeting did not take place because he did not find me in.
VYSHINSKY: You have an extraordinarily good memory for
exactly those meetings which did not take place.
BUKHARIN: I do not remember the meetings which did not
take place, because they are a phantom, but I do remember those
which. did materialize.
VYSHINSKY: You are trying to convince us that when you met
your accomplice you did not discuss counter-revolutionary subjects with him?
BUKHARIN: I did not discuss them with him not out of virtue,
but because the circumstances did not favour such a discussion.
VYSHINSKY: Ikramov, what have you got to say?
IKRAMOV: He is absolutely right in what he says about Kazakhstan. We did talk about Kazakhstan. He said that in coming
he was looking through the window of the railway car and what he
saw was something terrible. I agreed with him. I have already
explained what kind of a person I had been before that. I gave
him my consent immediately.
VYSHINSKY: That was in 1933?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
351

VYSHINSKY: But what about 1935? Bukharin denies that in
that year you had a conversation with him on the fourth floor of
a certain house on Zubovsky Boulevard and that you discussed your
counter-revolutionary work.
IKRAMOV: The circumstances were indeed such ...• There
were three outsiders present.
VYSHINSKY: Was there only one room in the apartment?
IKRAMOV: We had supper in the kitchen, then we went to
another room, a well-furnished room ....
VYSHINSKY: Hence there was another room, a separate room
in which two people could have a chat undisturbed.
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Why i~ it then that Bukharin says that circumstances were not favourable?
IKRAMOV: Let the Court judge for itself. There were three
rooms in the apartment. I remember well that we had supper in the
kitchen. Then it was so arranged that we, the two men, had to go
out. You understand?
VYSHINSKY: I understand.
Accused Bukharin, did you, after 1933, in general maintain
anti-Soviet contact with Ikramov?
BUKHARIN: I met him in the years 1933-34 or in 1932-33,
I do not remember exactly.
VYSHINSKY: Did you meet him after that time when you
enrolled him?
BUKHARIN: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk to him on subjects connected with
your anti-Soviet activity?
BUKHARIN: I did.
VYSHINSKY: This is the main thing. Be seated.
Accused Ikramov, proceed.
IKRAMOV: The main conversation was to the following.effect.
Bukharin said, why have we got two groups-Faizulla Khodjayev's
and Ikramov's? We ought to work together, but why could I not be
in one organization with Faizulla, why aren't our activities
combined? That would in no way aggravate my crimes ....
VYSHINSKY: But in the long run you came to an understanding with Khodjayev?
IKRAMOV: In the years 1925-27 there was an acute struggle
going on between me and Faizulla Khodjayev. I do not want to say
that I was a Communist, but perhaps there was a subconscious
feeling that I was an ally, a temporary fellow-traveller. When the
land and irrigation reform was introduced (of those present here
Ivanov and Zelensky remember it), I was one of those who showed
active initiative in carrying out the land reform. I was entrusted
with the chairmanship and I saw the thing through. Perhaps, since
352

1 was a bourgeois national-democrat, the actual consummation of
this work, the liquidation of feudal economy, was to my liking.
VYSHINSKY: But it was not to Khodjayev's liking?
IKRAMOV: He himself testified yesterday with regard to the
"Group of the Eighteen." At the Second Party Conference of Uzbek·
istan the question was discussed, and it was pointed out that in
essence this group came out in favour of rejecting the land and irrigation reform.
VYSHINSKY: We heard this yesterday.
IKRAMOV: In connection with this question a struggle for
cadres developed . . . .
VYSHINSKY: How did your struggle with Khodjayev end?
IKRAMOV: It ended with the victory of the Party line, which
I defended.
VYSHINSKY: Did you form an alliance with Khodjayev?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Against whom?
IKRAMOV: Against the Soviet government.
VYSHINSKY: So at first you fought and then you became re·
conciled?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And you began to fight the Soviet government
together?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Khodjayev, is this correct?
KHODJAYEV: With your permission, I should like to give my
explanations with regard to this question.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
KHODJAYEV: I want to say that lkramov is not quite correct
in what he says-that up to 1933, before his conversation with Bukharin, there was no co-ordination of action between me and him.
VYSHINSKY: There was?
KHODJAYEV: There was. In 1925 I indeed did not agree with
the form of the land and irrigation refo.rm. It was too much to the
detriment of the bai and kulak upper stratum of the countryside.
VYSHINSKY: This was not to your liking?
KHODJAYEV: It was not to my liking and I opposed it. It is
true that at that time this group of three, that is to say, Zelensky,
Ikramov and Ivanov, taking cover behind the Party line, the correct Party line, defeated me .
.VYSHINSKY: But they took cover?
KHODJAYEV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Why do you think that they were taking cover?
KHODJAYEV: Because Zelensky has told. you who he was,
Ivanov has told you who he was, Ikramov tried to deny, but that
didn't work either. Consequently, they were taking cover.
23

353

VYSHINSKY: ·Correct.
KHODJAYEV: I want to say that my sins were more or less
known. This made it easier for them to flay me. In 1926-27
. I carried on no joint activity with Ikramov, but since 1928 we
have worked together.
VYSHINSKY: In what sense have you worked?
KHOO JAYEV: In the sense of carrying on wrecking activities.
I do not put any other sense into these words. Ikramov is wrong
in trying to say that only after Bukharin brought pressure to
bear on him in 1933 did he accept the position of wrecking and
work together with ine. In this way he is trying to exonerate
himself of part of the guilt, just as he was trying to lay at the
door of Karimov the leadership of the nationalist organization.
I think that this is unworthy of Ikramov.
lKRAMOV: Permit me to continue.
VYSHINSKY: No, just a moment. I want to put some more
questions to the accused Khodjayev. But, after all, did Bukharin
play any role in uniting your counter-revolutionary forces?
KHODJAYEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What role?
KHODJAYEV: In the sense that although, beginning with
1928, we worked together with Ikramov, we did wrecking work
together, the struggle for influence in Uzbekistan at times interfered, if I may say so, with the fruitfulness of this anti-Soviet
activity. Therefore, first Bukharin in the conversation to which
Ikramov is referring (I did not speak to Bukharin directly at that
time), and then Antipov, said that I ought to join hands with
Ikramov. They said that we should work together, that we should
carry on the struggle together....
VYSHINSKY: Against?
KHODJAYEV: Against the Soviet government, agq.inst the
Party, against the leadership of the Party.
VYSHINSKY: Is this true, accused Ikramov?
IKRAMOV: It is. If I had been permitted, I would have- said
the same.
VYSHINSKY: - Do you confirm what Khodjayev is saying
here-that Bukharip played a tremendous role in the amalgamation
of your counter-revolutionary forces?
IKRAMOV:· Well, of course.
VYSHINSKY: And does Bukhttrin confirm this?
BUKHARIN: I should like to say ...
VYSHINSKY: Not just now~
IKRAMOV: I .want to say that beginning With 1925, inasmuch
as there was such an acute strµggle going on up to 1929, up. to
the Fourth Kun,Utai, there was no unity between me and Faiz;ulla .
.304

Aftet the Fourth Kuru1tai there Was such joint action. Here it
is only a matter of detail.
VYSH INSKY: But for appearances' sake, you still kept on
fighting between yo'urselves?
IKRAMOV: No, we did not fight for appearances' sake.
VYSHINSKY: Why, you- are fighting now. So how can you
·
deny that you were fighting?
IKRAMOV: That was not a sincere fight, it was just a sham.
VYSHINSKY: Cock-fights?
IKRAMOV: Not even cock-fights. Cocks sometimes fight
·
until blood is drawn.
VYSHINSKY: There were no fights even of this nature?
IKRAMOV: No.
VYSH INS KY: Not even cock-fights?
IKRAMov: No.
.
VYSHINSKY: At first it was a tacit fight, and then Bukharin came and reconciled you in essence as well. Do I understand
you right?.
·
IKRAMOV: Yes. I will tell you about it.
VYSHINSKY: Please.
IKRAMOV: In our underground nationalist organization, ,-y;e
had come to an understanding to try not to admit any 'of the
nationalists into this organization. Not because we had no.need
of them, but because there was a pile of material about each 'of
them.
·
VYSHINSKY: Where?
IKRAMOV: In the organs of the Soviet government which have
access to all documents. Very many of them who worked in various
spheres were exposed by th~· Party and by the people; the press
wrote about it. Therefore, 'in order to succeed in preserving
complete secrecy, we decided not to admit these people. Yesterday
Faizulla found proof somewhere that I was trying to keep something
back. I am not holding anythfng back. Whatever fads there w~re
I am telling aboul. What did we do? We did not aamit these
people. Khodjayev says that during 1925-28 there was a lull in
his activities, he had no. people. Most of our People's Commissars
were Pan-Tyurkists and nationalists: Khidyr Aliyev, Khadjibayev,
Kurbanov and others. They were a11 people who were connected
with Faizulla. The acute struggle left a certain imprint on us with
regard to each other. They might have been in Uzbekistan today.
In 1933 we might perhaps have come to terms with them. At
present there is no difference between me and them. Since 1931
there has been no difference.
VYSHINSKY: And with Bukharin?
IKRAMOV: With Bukharin, since 1933.
VYSHINSKY: What, then, wa/Bukharin's role?
23*

355

tKRAMOV: Bukharin said, "Why have you got two gtoups1
You ought to unite." I gave him no definite answer at the time.
At the end of 1934 Antipov came to visit us. He told me that, on
instructions of the centre of the Rights, it was absolutely necessary to unite our two organizations, so that there should be an
understanding with regard to all questions and joint action. He
did not demand formal unity, but unity in essence. After that the
actual union of our two organizations was effected, just as it was
in the case between the Trotskyite~ and the Rights, but at the
same time each of our organizations preserved its own loathsome
face. That is why, when I spoke of this yesterday, I said that
since 1929 there has been tacit co-ordination of work between
Faizulla and me. I spoke about this. Why then does he say here that
I am trying to place the blame on somebody? This is not true.
I am not laying my guilt at anybody's door. Such an understanding
between the two organizations was established in: 1934. The three
of us-Antipov, Khodjayev and Ikramov-met together. We came
to an understanding with regard to the joint activities G>f our organizations.
Now further, why did we not want to admit the old nationalist
intellectuals? When Burnashev put the question before me in 1928
that i.t was necessary for me to effect a rapprochement with Khodjayev, at that time I really thought: here is a clever man, a capable
man, we may effect a rapprochement. But at that time I received
a note from a certain Mukhitdinov saying that he had sent a statement to the Central Asia· Bureau or to the G.P.U. in which
he repented of his counter-revolutionary crimes and in which he
told the most terrible things about Faizulla. I thought: now the question will shortly come up for discussion, and I, together with Faizulla,
might be exposed too soon. He testified that he had received Enver
Pasha-that was a well-known Turkish adventurer. So everything
was not quite on the level there. We were both sullied, birds of
a feather, only I had a tactical consideration.
VYSHINSKY: There was material against him, but there was
none against you?
IKRAMOV: There was none against me.
VYSHINSKY: So you figured that you ought not to have anything to do with him, that it was dangerous, that you might be
exposed yourself?
IKRAMOV: Yes, that is correct. I have spoken about it and
I ~ave not hidden behind anything. I do not want to minimize my
cnmes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Khodjayev, what have you got to say
about the Basmachi Maxum?
KHODJAYEV: Maxum was the chief of a militia detachment
attached to the Chairman of the Revolutionary Committee. In
356

1921 we disarmed him in Bokhara, but he escaped. Soon after he
was caught and put on trial. This was after the orientation towards
the Basmachis was accepted.
VYSHINSKY: Accepted by whom?
KHOO JA YEV: By us.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, you helped him to avoid being
called to account?
KHODJAYEV: He was amnestied.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have a Basmachi orientation?
In the first place, Mukhitdinov was an important Basmachi.
KHOO JA YEV: Not a Basmachi, he was a national-democrat.
VYSHINSKY: Did you maintain contact with him?
KHOO JA YEV: Maxum was connected with him. He might
have compromised me.
VYSHINSKY: And to what extent might he have compromised
you?
KHODJAYEV: I do not understand what Ikramov has been
saying here. The note to which lkramov has been referring is in
the records of my case.
VYSH INS KY: Was Maxurn there?
KHODJAYEV: Yes, he was.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have a meeting with Enver Pasha?
KHODJAYEV: We had three meetings.
VYSHINSKY: When?
KHODJAYEV: Two meetings in Bokhara were official, one
meeting in my apartment was unofficial.
VYSHINSKY: What were the purposes of this meeting?
KHODJAYEV: The purpose of the last meeting was to discuss
Enver Pasha's proposal as to what line the Bokhara government
was to take with regard to the Soviet Union and what tactics were
necessary.
VYSHINSKY: You concealed these meetings from the Soviet
government, did you not?
KHODJAYEV: Absolutely.
VYSHINSKY: Was that what Maxum's note referred to?
KHODJAYEV: No, he merely stated that he was not reporting
anything that would implicate him in counter-revolution and that
he was trying to make me responsible for the Bokhara counter-revolutionary nationalist organization. This was done with a purpose,.
and I sent him a note in answer to this then.
VYSHINSKY: And did he refer to your connection with some
people?
KHODJAYEV: Yes.
Permit me to add to this. Zelensky here spoke apparently
very truthfully about his activities in Central Asia. He said that
he supported the Rights, Faizulla Khodjayev and Atabayev. It was

357

nof myself whom Zelensky supported, but Mukhitdinov, who
had an English orientation, but he said not a word of this.
VYSHINSKY: We shall ask him now.
Accused Zelensky, tell us, did this episode with Mukhitdinov take place?
ZELENSKY: I had to come out against Khodjayev from time
to time, otherwise I would have exposed myself. Now as for
Mukhitdinov. It is the first time I hear he was awarded the Order
of· the Banner of Labour.
VYSHINSKY: Who awarded it to him?
ZELENSKY: I do not know.
KHOO JAYEV: He was awarded the Order in 1936 or 1937
by decision of the Central Executive Commitee of Uzbekistan on
a proposal made by Zelensky and Ikramov. I can .Produce the corresponding documents dealing with this question.
ZELENSKY: I have no idea.
IKRAMOV: l once travelled with Mukhitdinov from Moscow
in the same railway car. I saw the man once. He was an extremely
hateful man. I entertained such hatred for him. All the time he
was flaunting the Tadjik question, setting up the Tadjiks in opposition to the Uzbeks. I never saw a more hateful man than he.
VYSHINSKY: But you tell us, did he get an Order?
IKRAMOV: I simply do not remember it. Perhaps Faizulla has
just made a mistake. I might award one to anybody, but not to
this Mukhitdinov.
VYSHINSKY: And was Zelensky Secretary at that time?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: In any event, if he was awarded, it could not
have been decided without Zelensky.
IKRAMOV: It could have been decided.
VYSHINSKY: 'How so, without the Secretary of the Central
Asia Bureau?
IKRAMOV: It sometimes happened that the Central Committee
of Uzbekistan considered such questions by itself.
VYSHJNSKY: This is an isolated episode. I have gone into
it at the request of f?.izulla Khodjayev. While Zelensky has not
resumed his seat, may l question him with regard to one circumstance?
(To Zelensky.) In what year were you in Central Asia?
ZELENSKY: In 1924.
VYSHINSKY: And how long did you stay there?
ZELENSKY: Until January 1931.
VYSHINSKY: So you spent seven years there?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: During these seven years, while you were en·
JQ~

gaged in counter-revolutionary wrecking activities,. did you have
any connections with Ikramov and Khodjayev?
ZELENSKY: I had no connections with Ikramov, but I did
cover up Khodjayev's new line.
VYSHINSKY: So you pursued your line independently?
ZELENSKY: Independently.
VYSHINSKY: And how can you explain the fact that you did
not get in touch with the one or the other?
ZELENSKY: There was no need. Perhaps I was a little afraid
of them.
VYSHINSKY: What were you afraid of?
ZELENSKY: Exposure.
VYSHINSKY: Exposure? So it was from· considerations of
secrecy? And did you see· what they were engaged in?
ZELENSKY: Well, you see, I must say that with regard to
Ikramov I had no doubts up to 1928 that he maintained the positions of the Party, only giving in from time to time to his nationalist tendencies.
VYSHINSKY: And since 1928?
ZELENSKY: Since 1928 I had begun to realize· more clearly
that Ikramov was connected with a nationalist organization, and
when the "Mi lli-Istiklal '.' organization was exposed, then,. for
reasons of self-prese~vat10n, I came out very strongly against
Ikramov-this is known from the records of the Fourth KurultaiI raised the question of his being removed from his post and even
of having him arrested.
VYSHINSKY: By way of insuring yourself?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, by way of. insuring yourself.
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you knew of· his counter-revolutionary activity, and what you did· you did in essence for the
purpose of insuring yourself?
ZELENSKY: I did not know. ·of it, but I presumed.
VYSHINSKY: Did you raise the question of :arrest only on
the basis of a presumption? You say that for the purpose of insuring yourself you raised the question of having Ikramov
arrested.
ZELENSKY: I did.
VYSHINSKY: On what grounds? Why should he be arrested?
ZELENSKY: When the "Milli-Istiklal" was exposed, a number of the members of this organization said in their depositions
in the organs of the O.G.P.U. that Ikramov was the actual
leader of this organizatiort:'
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you knew from the depositions
of a number of members that Ikrama¥ was the leader?

359

. ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And, in order to insure yourself, you raised
the question of having Ikramov arrested?
ZELENSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: But did you actually fight against his counterrevolutionary activities?
ZELENSKY: I was very soon recalled from there.
VYSHINSKY: No, but you say that it became clear to you
in 1928 that lkramov was carrying on nationalist counter-revolutionary work.
ZELENSKY: Yes, it became clear. Formally, I waged a fight
against him.
VYSHINSKY: But actually you di"d f!Ot wage a fight against
•.
trim?
ZELENSKY: Actually, I did not, and could not.
VYSHINSKY: Why could you not?
ZELENSKY: Faizulla has already described me here as .
VYSHINSKY: Do you agree with the description Faizulla gave
of you?
ZELENSKY: I myself gave such a description of myselfactually, I did not fight; I could not fight, because I myself was
a traitor.
IKRAMOV: Well, to continue. Under the direct leadership of
Antipov, and on the instructions of the Right centre, a bloc of
both nationalist organizations was formed. Antipov informed me
about the German-Japanese orientation and about the connections
with the Germans and Japanese. He also told me that there was
a military group, and that in the event of war they would act by
opening the front to the attacking forces of the interventionists.
He then said that we too must act. We did not at that time speak
about wrecking yet; there was no wrecking at that time. On the
question of insurrection no practical instructions had been given
to the organizations, and he therefore said that we must act.
· At the second meeting with Bukharin he said nothing about
politics, but told me why he had connected us with Antipov. He
said that it would not do for him and me to meet, but Antipov
visited Central Asia nearly every year on cotton business and
the position he occupied was such that I could always go and see
him on business. We agreed that permanent contact should be
maintained with Antipov. He asked me about actions. I told him
that we were carrying on some wrecking work. He said that it
was entirely inadequate, that it must be extended, that we must
act, that no time ·must be lost.
The ~d meeting dealt with connections with England. Faizulla spoke-~bout that yesterday. It is true that Faizulla Khodjayev informea._ me in October.,.. 1936 that Bukharin had spoken to
360

him, that Bukharin was very optimistic about the capitalist stabilization of European countries, especially of the fascist states.
He said that we must orientate ourselves on England. As the
question was a serious and important one, at the end of November
or the beginning of December 1936 I asked Bukharin about it.
He replied in the affirmative.
VYSH INSKY: Bukharin replied in the affirmative?
IKRAMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Where did he say that?
IKRAMOV: It was during the Congress of Soviets in November or the beginning of December 1936. During the Congress
of Soviets I met Bukharin on the staircase; nobody was about, and
I asked him about this. He answered in the affirmative, and formulated it as follows: if there will not be a war just now, if there
will not be intervention soon, it is all over with our business.
They will bag us all, yet we cannot expedite war because of England,
which in certain respects is an international arbiter. As long as
she does not decide one way or another, as long as she does not
arrive at some decision, there will be no war. But at present, in the
war that is brewing, the British will not raise the question until
it is clear to them what they can get, and where. It is well known,
Bukharin said, tbat the British have long had their eyes on
Turkestan as a choice morsel. If such proposals are made, the
British perhaps would more quickly come over to the side of an
aggressor against the Soviet Union.
That is why I believed Faizulla Khodjayev when he told me
about the orientation on England. In Uzbekistan, the people
hate the imperialists, especially the British. Before they used
to come and trade with us, then there were their representatives,
they went back through this way. They know that in India ...
THE PRESIDENT: Accused lkramov, you must not deal with
the internal affairs of other states. Let us have your testimony.
IKRAMOV: The people of Uzbekistan would rise up against
such a proposal, no matter who made it. We would be flung out
neck and crop. I was not the sort of man to be easily frightened,
but the sentiments of the nation alarmed me. I decided to verify
what Faizulla Khodjayev -had told me in October 1936.
It was Antipov who told me about terrorism. I said to him,
"How is this, you instructed us to form a terrorist group in
Uzbekistan?" He replied that it was to test our readiness,
but actually it would be done here. If anybody wanted to come
to us-they would hardly get there. -He boasted that whoever the
Rights had decided to kill would never reach Central Asia.
VYSHINSKY: Who said that?
IKRAMOV: Antipov.
I was connected in Tadjikistan-through Rakhimbayev~

361

with a nationalist counter-revolutionary ·organization of the same
type as the one in Uzbekistan. True, there was only one occasion
when we talked about it, but I was connected with the Tadjik
counter-revolutionary organization through Rakhimbayev. If necessary, I can tell you in detail. ...
VYSHINSKY: The investigation on that case is not yet completed, so that it would be better if you did not give any details.
IKRAMOV: Faizulla told me that he had formed, or was forming,
contacts with the organization in Turkmenistan. I did not question him about details.
Permit me now to relate what our nationalist counter-revolutionary organization did in execution of its plan, of its program.
After Bukharin had rebuked me for inadequate activity, I myself
committed a direct wrecking act. In 1935, we-Lyubimov,
Faizulla Khodjayev and I-jointly issued directions, signed by
Lyubimov and lkrarnov (they were not signed by Faizulla, I think)
that cotton with a moisture content exceeding the standard
fixed by the government of the Union should be accepted, as a result of which 14,000 tons of cotton perished, of which 2,600
tons were sent to the cotton-wool factory, and the rest graded
at lower qualities. The loss amounted to several million rubles.
VYSHINSKY: Was this done by you deliberately?
IKRAMOV: Of course. If it had been accidental, I would not
have -spoken about it here. Wr.ecking work was done in the caracul ·
business. We did not do it ourselves directly, but through members of our organization. The grades were lowered. In 1936, owing
to ·wrong methods of treatment, there was a 27 per cent lowering
of grades. In 1937 caracul skins were damaged wholesale during
steam treatment-a huge number of skins were scalded.· This ·
was also done by members of our organization (Sata Khodjayev
was working there).
Wrecking activities were also carried on in the municipal·
enterprises of Tashkent and Bokhara. A member of our organization named Tadjiyev was active in Tashkent-he did wrecking
work in the planning of the drainage system and in building construction.
Here is an example of wrecking work in the sphere of building construction. Tashkent is divided into two parts: the old
town and the new town. There is no drainage system· in the orn ·
town, there are extensive stretches of territory where houses cannot be built. In addition, there are many cesspools. Building operations were begun on the new premises of the People's CommiS-'
sariat of Post and Telegraph, but in· view of· the fact that there ·
were nineteen cesspools, the laying of the foundation had to be
begun at a depth of 30 or 40 metres.
.
·
.. There was also wrecking-work in the municipal enterprises ·of
3&2-

Bokhara. The city was allowed to fall to pieces. Houses were sold
off. The inhabitants were called upon to pay intolerable rates,
they abandoned their houses, which were then sold off.
The funds granted by the government of the U.S.S.R. for.
district development were deliberately dissipated on numerous
projects so as to secure the minimum effect. In 1937 uncomp feted
construction work amounted to a total of 34,000,000 rubles.
VYSHINSKY: All because of the ·wasteful distribution of
funds?
IKRAMOV: Yes. That was the work of Karimov and Faizulta
Khodjayev.
VYSHINSKY: Not yours?
IKRAMOV: I had no direct connection with it, but it goes
without saying that I must be held no less responsible.
· VYSHINSKY: Was it done with your knowledge?
IK RAMOV: Of course. And if I had wanted to, I could have exposed it. Wrecking on an equally large scale, to which we .closed
our eyes, took place in the building operations of the People's
Commissariat of Light Industry, at the cotton plants and the:
silk mills. I cannot remember the figures just now, but enormous
sums were invested in building operations that were carried''over
from year to year. I think that the building cperatfons of the
People's Commissariat of Light lndustryfo the silk branch were
planned at 300,000,000 rubles. Of this, 80,000,000 rubles have
been invested in construction work, and the remainder is carried
over from year to year in the form of uncompleted construction.
In Namangan the construction 'of a silk-winding mill was begun.
About one and a half or two million rubles were spent, but in the
middle of the year it was said that the building job would have to
be put into conservation. l was ·very much astonished, because..
I did not know the technique of this business. It was said that 'half
a million rubles would be required for conservation putpbses,
and the People's Commissariat of Light Industry did in fact assign'
half a million rubles for conservation purPose8.
Five million rubles were :spent on the· construction of a cotfon
ginning plant in Bokhara. Th~ .Plant was readY:, but could.
nut function, even though the machmery had been delivered. Why?
Because there were no presses.
VYSHINSKY: How much does a press cost?
IKRAMOV: Probably about 100,000 or 200,000 rubles. Even
the houses for the workers and office staffs have been built, but the
plant is at a standstill and is now being used as a storehouse.
VYSHINSKY: Who is responsible for that?
IKRAMOV: The People's Commissariat of Light Industry is
responsible for it, in. particular. But I also am responsible, of
course, as a man who closed his eyes ·to it.

363-

VYSHINSKY: You shielded it?
IKRAMOV: Of course. I pretended that I saw nothing. The
same applies to the cotton warehouses. That is what I have to
say in reference to wrecking work. Now as to insurrections. Faizulla
spoke about this in his testimony.
VYSHINSKY: What did you do to organize insurrectionary
bands?
IKRAMOV: We gave them instructions to this effect. What
was actually done, I do not know. But Baltabayev said that
Almazov had told him that he had already started on this work
in the Margalan district and that he already had some cadres.
VYSHINSKY: That is, you mustered cadres?
IKRAMOV: Then Faizulla, I think it was, told me that preparations in this direction were being made in Bokhara. That
is what I have· to say about my crimes against the Soviet power.
If I may sum up, I would formulate my crimes as follows: treason to the Socialist fatherland and treason to the Soviet people,
in·the first place to the Uzbek people, who had nurtured me and
reared me.
THE PRESIDENT (to Vyshinsky): Have you any questions
to put to the accused Ikramov?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for half an hour.

*

*

*

. COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
(To Vyshinsky.) Have you any questions to put to the accused
Ikramov?
VYSHINSKY: I have a question to put to the accused Bessonov.
THE PRESIDENT: Very well.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bessonov, I would like you to give us
more precise information about your meeting with the SocialistR~volutionary Maslov. You told us on the first day of the trial
that you had received instructions from Pyatakov to establish connections with the Socialist-Revolutionaries?
. BESSONOV: Yes, I did say that.
VYSHINSKY: Through whom did you do this?
BESSO NOV: I am referring to connections with the "Trudovaya
Krestyanskaya Partia."
VYSHINSKY: A Socialist·Revolutionary Party?
BESSONOV: The base of which consisted of remnants of the
old Socialist-Revolutionary Party.

364

VVSHlNSKY: And so you were referring to connections with
the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia," which was made up of
remnants of the old Socialist-Revoluti0nary Party?
BESSONOV: Yes, that is so.
VYSH INS KY: Continue.
BESSONOV: In the autumn of 1934, during one of my usual
meetings with Pyatakov, he referred for the first time to my Socialist-Revolutionary past, and, in particular, questioned me very
closely about the Vologda period of my activities. I gave him a detailed description of the active figures in the Northern group of the
Socialist-Revolutionary Party, in particular of Sergei Semyonovich
Maslov, who was in the past, and is at present, a leader of the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia," which he had founded while in exile
abroad. I asked Pyatakov why he was interested in my Socialist-Revolutionary past. Pyatakov said that he had reasons, which had been
partly suggested by conversations with the Rights and had partly
arisen in his own mind independently. And, indeed, before I left
for Berlin, about a month after this conversation, Pyatakov asked
me to go and see Maslov, justifying the necessity for this meeting
by the following arguments. Firstly, he had information, coming
from the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," that the "Trudovaya
Krestyanskaya Partia" possessed fairly considerable cadresamong
the rural intelligentsia, chiefly among co-operative officials and
agronomists. Its program and tactics were such as to make it an
organization with which contact could easily and should be established. As I knew Maslov very well from past work, when I was sti 11 in
the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, and as I was permanently residing
abroad, it seemed to him that I was a suitable person to sound out
the ground for an agreement with the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya
Partia."
VYSHINSKY: An agreement of the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya
Partia" with whom?
BESSONOV: Pyatakov spoke in his own name, that is, in the _
name of the Trotskyites and of the bloc. As I have said, the idea
of the agreement arose in his mind partly independently, partly
under the influence of conversations with the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: Do you remember with whom he conducted these
conversations?
·
BESSONOV: He did not mention any names.
VYSHINSKY: But whom did· he have in mind?
BESSO NOV: I think it was somebody working in the People's
Commissariat of Agriculture, because in the c9urse of subsequent
negotiations with Maslov I learnt that people working in the Commissariat of Agriculture were involved.
Somewhat later, after my meeting with Maslov, I received instructions to connect Maslov with people working in Czechoslovakia.
~65

VYSHtNSKY: Did your meeting with Maslov take place?
BESSONOV: It did; not in 1934, however, but in 1935, in
the summer.
·
VYSHINSKY: Where did it take place?
BESSONOV: In Prague.
VYSHINSKY: Why in Prague?
BESSONOV: Maslov is permanently resident in Prague.
VYSH INS KY: How long has he been living there?
BESSONOV: As far as I know, he has been living in Prague
since 1922 or ttie end of 1921. ·
VYSHINSKY: Did he settle in Prague shortly after the October
Revolution?
·
BESSONOV: I cannot say exactly, but I think that Maslov
emigrated from the Soviet Union in 1921.
· VYSHINSKY: In a word, as far as you kno~ he had been liv·
ing in Prague for a long time?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What was he doing there?
BESSONOV: He was publishing magazines and n~wspapers.
VYSHINSKY: On what funds?
BESSONOV: That was elucidated during my talk with him ....
· VYSHINSKY: On what funds was he publishing newspap~rs
.and magazines?
BESSONOV: At the beginning of the conversation-that ques·
tion interested me too-I elucidated what he possessed.
VYSHINSKY: Or on what funds he was living?
BESSONOV: He was lfving quite well. He depends upon his
old friends. When I asked him about this aspect of the matter,
Maslov said that he received funds from the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia." This party was formed in 1921.
VYSHINSKY: I am not interested how it was formed; or what
its ideas are, but on what funds it existed.
BESSONOV: You want me to say on what funds?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, if you know.
BESSONOV: He said: the same as you. I spoke to him in the
name of Pyatakov.
VYSH INSKY: Who was this "you"?
BESSONOV: "You'" means the Trotskyites. He said that if
you are not squeamish about receiving funds for your activities,
still less can you expect Maslov to be. He frankly said that he had
sources of financial aid among Polish, Rumanian and Yugoslavian
circles.
·
·
· VYSHINSKY: That is, to put it bluntly, how should this be
interpreted in the language of actual relations?
··
BESSONOV; In each of these countries there is a fairly large
.section of the ruling cl~ss which is interested both in the activities

366

of the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya f>artia;, and in the acti vi tjes .of
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites.,,
VYSHINSKY: That is, in other words, they were maintained
by them?
BESSONOV: By these circles.
VYSHINSKY: By these reactionary, bourgeois circles?
BESSONOV: Yes.
.
VYSHINSKY: And were not the Socialist-Revolutionaries connected with intelligence services?
BESSONOV: I _learnt at the beginning of the conversation with
Maslov .that he was conn~cted with the Henlein organization.
VYSHINSKY: What sort of an organization is that?
BESSONOV: The Henlein orgat;tization is so well known ..•
VYSHINSKY: Tell us about it all the same.
BESSONOV: It is an organization which is pursuing the aim
of uniting Bohemia to Germany. It is an organization which
is a fascist organization in both form and content.
VYSHINSKY: Maslov published his newspapers and magazines,
and at the same time he and his organization were maintained by
re~ctionary bourgeois circles-Polish, Rumanian and Bulgarian?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: He was in addition connected with other organizations?
BESSONOV: He was connected with the Henlein organization.
VYSHINSKY: What sort of an organization is that? What is
it?
BESSONOV: An agency of German fascism in Czechoslovakia.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, he is connected \_Vith the.German
intelligence service?
, BESSONOV: I am accustomed to precision in such matters....
- THE PRESIDENT: Will you speak a little louder, please?
BESSONOV: It is an organization of fascist agents directed .by
the Foreign Department of the National-SociaHst Party, which has
its headquarters inMunichand which is on.eof the organizations of
German fascism for the development of aggression, but which,
strictly speaking, cannot be called an intelligence service.
VYSHINSKY: It pursues its specific tasks, and works in
accordance with a common plan with the intelligence service?
BESSONOV: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: What dici you talk to Maslov about?
BESSONOV: I explained to him the substance of the instructions I had received from Pyatakov. After explaining in fairly
great detail what the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia," in his
opi.ni.on, as he described it, h~d at ~ts dispos_al in th7 Soviet Uni~n,
about which I have given detailed rnformahon dunng the prehminary investigation-I do not know if it is necessary to speak about

or

J67

It here-Maslov mentioned three conditiorts ort which he was
prepared to place his organization under the general control of
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." These conditions, which
were very heterogeneous, contained an agreement on certain
questions of program. He referred in particular to the rural question
and the national question, but stressed the fact that this was of
no essential importance. His main condition was that he should
be immediately given a certain sum of money by the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites, '' both in foreign currency and in Soviet
currency. Then the work of the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia"
was to be afforded the legal opportunities which the bloc possessed.
In return for these conditions, he thought it possible to give directions to his organization in the Soviet Union and to subordinate the
work of the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia" to the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites" along all lines. Of course, I could not reply
to all these questions. But in 1936 I put Maslov in touch with
Trotsky's representative, who came to an arrangement with him
on this point.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, when talking to you, did Maslov express
the wish to be put in contact with Trotsky?
BESSONOV: He said that he had tried to establish contact
with Trotsky through a Czech Trotskyite.
VYSHINSKY: But did he not say on whose initiative, who it
was that first expressed the desire to arrange a meeting with
Trotsky? Did he not refer to the Henlein?
BESSONOV: He did. I mentioned this in the preliminary
investigation. That is how it was. He did refer to the Henlein.
He said that preparations had recently been made for amalgamation with the Henlein organization, and that in the near future
an amalgamation would take place of all the opposition groups
which were active in the Soviet Union and co-ordinating their
activities with the appropriate organs of fascist Germany.
VYSH IN SKY: That is, all the fascist groups?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: How did he regard this prospect of connections
with Trotsky?
BESSONOV: This connection was established by me.
VYSHINSKY: That is, the commission you had to establi-sh
contact between Maslov and Trotsky was fulfilled by you, and
an agreement was arrived at as a result? That agreement was based
on those few conditions you have mentioned?
BESSONOV: These conditions form an integral part of it.
As to the organizational side, there were two conditions: firstly, that
the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia" was to be given a certain sum
of money by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" in foreign currency and Soviet currency, and that the "bloc of Rights and Trots368

kyites" was to place at the disposal of Maslov. and hence of
the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia • ., the legal opportunities
which the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" possessed in view of
the official positions held by its members. Whether this agreement
included an arrangement on questions of program, which Maslov
himself did not consider very essential, I cannot say; but I do in
fact consider that this question did not have any serious significance in the negotiations, a point which Maslov himself stressed.
VYSHINSKY: Did you in your talk with Maslov refer in
one degree or an other to Bukharin and Rykov?
BESSONOV: Maslov said that he was very well informed
on the development of the anti-Soviet gr.oups within the Soviet
Union, and that he was informed both by reports received from
his foreign friends, as he put it, and by reports he received
directly from his nuclei in the Soviet Union.
In addition, he said that he had taken steps to establish contact with some of the Rights. In this connection he mentioned
the name of A. I. Muralov of the People •s Commissariat of Agriculture, with whom he had established connections through some
co-operator, whose name I cannot now recall.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, he was aware of the anti-Soviet
activities of Bukharin and Rykov?
BESSONOV: Undoubtedly.
VYSHINSKY: And had connections with the Rights himself?
BESSONOV: He described this contact as a step towards the
establishment of stable .organizational connections with the
Rights.
VYSJiINSKY: There was an organizational contact, which
subsequently, thanks to his measures, was transformed into stable
organizational connections?
BESSONOV: Yes, in 1935.
VYSHINSKY: What else can you say in addition to what you
have said?
BESSONOV: Only perhaps about what the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia" had at its disposal.
VYSHINSKY: This concerns the investigation of the case of
the "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia" rather than the present
case. I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: We shall now proceed to the interrogation
of the accused Bukharin.
BUKHARIN: I have a request to make to the Court on the
following two points: firstly, to give me the opportunity of freely
presenting my case to the Court, and, secondly, to permit me at the
beginning of my statement to dwell more or less, as far as time
will permit, on an analysis of the ideological and political stand
of the criminal "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," for the follow24

369

ing reasons: firstly, because comparatively little has been said
about it, secondly, because it has a certain public interest, and
thirdly, because Citizen the Public Prosecutor put this question
at the previous session, if I am not mistaken.
VYSHINSKY: If the accused Bukharin intends in any way
to restrict the right of the State Prosecutor to put him questiorts
in the course of his explanations, I think that Comrade the President should explain to Bukharin that the right of the Prosecutor
to put questions is based on law. I therefore ask that this request
should be denied, as provided in the Code of Criminal Procedure .
. BUKHARIN: That is not what I meant by my request.
THE PRESIDENT: The first question to the accused Bukharin:
Do you confirm the testimony you gave at the preliminary investiga.tion about your anti-Soviet activities?
BUKHARIN: 1 confirm my testimony fully and entirely.
THE PRESIDENT: What do you wish to say about your antiSoviet activities? And Comrade the Procurator is entitled to put
questions.
·
VYSMINSKY: Allow me to begin the interrogation of the
accused Bukharin. Formulate briefly what exactly it is you plead
guilty to.
BUKHARIN: Firstly, to belonging to the counter-revolutionary "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
VYSHfNSKY: Since what year?
BUKHARIN: From the moment the bloc was formed. Even
before that, I plead guilty to belonging to the counter-revolutionary organization of the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: Since what year?
BUKHARIN: Roughly since 1928. I plead guilty to being
one of the outstanding leaders of this "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." Consequently, l plead guilty to what directly follows from
this, the sum total of crimes committed by this counter-revolutionary
organization, irrespective of whether or not I knew of, whether
or not I took a direct part, in any particular act. Because I am
responsible as one of the. leaders and not as a cog of this counterrevolutionary organization.
VYSHINSKY: .What aims were pursued by this counter-revolutionary organization?
.
BUKHARIN: This counter-revolutionary organization, to
formulate it briefly . . .
· VYSHINSKY: Yes, briefly for the present.
BUKHARIN: The principal aim it pursued although, so to
speak, it did not. fully realize it, and did not dot all the
"i's "-was essentia11y the aim of restoring capitalist relations
in the U.S.S.R.
VYSHINSKY: The overthrow of the Soviet power?

370

BUKHARIN: The overthrow of the Soviet power was a means
to this end.
VYSH!NSKY: By means of?
BUKHARIN: As is known ...
VYSHINSKY: By means of a forcible overthrow?
BUKHARIN: Yes, by means of the forcible overthrow of this
power.
VYSHINSKY: With the help of?
BUKHARIN: With the help of all the difficulties encountered
by the Soviet power; in particular, with the he:p of a war
which prognostica!ly was in prospect.
:
VYSHINSKY: Which was prognostically in prospect, with
whose help?
· BUKHARIN: With the help of foreign states.
VYSHINSKY: On condition?
BUKHARIN: On condition, to put it concretely, of a number
·of concessions.
'
VYSHINSKY: To the extent of . . .
BUKHARIN: To the extent of the cession of territory.
VYSHINSKY: That is?
BUKHARIN: If all the "i's" are dotted-on condition of
the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R.
VYSHINSKY: The severance of whole regions and republics
from the U.S.S.R.?
. BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: For example?
_
BUKHARIN: The Ukraine, the Maritime Region, Byelorussia.
3
VYSHINSKY: In whose favour?
BUKHARIN: In favour of the corresponding states, whose
geographical and political . . .
VYSHINSKY: Whic;h exactly?
BUKHARIN: In favour of Germany, in favour 9f Japan, and
.partly in favour of England.
VYSHINSKY: So, that was the agr~ement with the circles
concerned? I know of one agreement which the bloc had. ·
BUKHARIN: Yes, the bloc had an agreement.
· VYSHINSKY: And also by means of weakening the defensive
·power?
BUKHARIN: You see, this question was not discussed, at
least not in my presence.
.
VYSHINSKY: And what was the position with regard to
.wrecking?
BUKHARIN: The position with regard to. wrecking was that
·in the ~nd, especially under pressure of the Trotskyite part of
the so-called contact centre, which arose roughly in 1933, despite
24*

371

a number of internal differences and manipulatory political mechanics, which are of no interest to the investigation, after
various vicissitudes, disputes and so on, the orientation on wrecking
was adopted.
VYSHINSKY: Did it tend to weaken the defensive power of
our country?
BUKHARIN:. Naturally.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, there was an orientation on the
weakening, the undermining of defensive power?
BUKHARIN: Not formally, but essentially it was so.
VYSHINSKY: But the actions and activity in this direction
were clear?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Can you say the same about diversive acts?
BUKHARIN: With regard to diversive acts-by virtue of
the division of labour and my definite functions, of which you
know-I mainly occupied myself with the problematics of general
teadership and with the ideological side; this, of course, did not
exclude either my being aware of the practical side of the matter,.
-0r the adoption of a number of practical steps on my part.
VYSHINSKY: As I understand you, there was a division of
1abour among you.
BUKHARIN: But I, Citizen Procurator, say that I bear responsibility for the bloc.
VYSHINSKY: But the bloc which you headed set itself the
aim of organizing diversive acts?
BUKHARIN: As far as I can judge by various things that
rise in my memory, this was made dependent on concrete circumstances and concrete conditions.
VYSHINSKY: As you see from the trial, the circumstances
were concrete enough. Did you and Khodjayev discuss the fact that
too little wrecking was being done, and being done badly?
BUKHARIN: About accelerating wrecking there was no talk.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to question the accused Khodjayev.,
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Khodjayev, did you discuss with
Bukharin the question of accelerating wrecking activities?
KHODJAYEV: In August 1936, when I spoke to Bukharin
in my country house, he said that wrecking work was feeble in
our nationalist organization.
VYSHINSKY: And what ought to be done about it?
KHOD JA YEV: To intensify it, and not only intensify the
wrecking work, but to proceed to the organization of uprisings~
terrorism, and so on.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, is what Khodjayev says
correct?
372

BUKHARIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: Was the organizationofaninsurrectionarymovement one of your aims?
BUKHARIN: There was an insurrectionary orientation.
VYSHINSKY: There was an orientation? Did you send Slepkov
to the North Caucasus to organize this business? Did you send
Yakovenko to Biisk for the same purpose?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And is this not what Khodjayev says in relation
to Central Asia?
BUKHARIN: I thought that when you asked about Central
Asia my answer should deal only with Central Asia.
VYSHINSKY: And so, you deny this fact with regard to Central
Asia, but not the line of the bloc, whereas I asked you about
the line of the bloc.
BUKHARIN: And I said that the question was decided from
case to case, depending upon geographical, political and other
conditions.
VYSHINSKY: You deny Khodjayev's testimony? I invited
Khodjayev just now to testify against you because I consider it
important to illustrate the fact that your "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" gave instructions from case to case, as you put it, depending upon circumstances, for the organization of an insurrectionary,
diversionist and wrecking movement. Do you agree with that? ·
BUKHARIN: I agree with that. Only I must clarify it,
so as. to avoid confusion. The uprisings you are referring to took
place in 1930, whereas the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was
organized, as you are aware, Citizen Procurator, in 1933.
VYSHINSKY: But its tactics did not differ in any way from
the tactics of your Right centre. Do you agree with that?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: That is, the organization of an insurrectionary
movement was part of the activities of the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" as well?
BUKHARIN: It was.
VYSHINSKY: And you bear responsibility for it?
BUKHARIN: I have already said that I bear responsibility
for the sum total of the actions.
VYSHINSKY: Did the bloc stand for the organization of terrorist acts, the assassination of leaders of the Party and the Soviet
government?
BUKHARIN: It did, and I think that the organization of this
must be dated back roughly to 1932, the autumn.
VYSHINSKY: And what was your relation to the assassination
of Sergei Mironovich Kirov? Was this assassination also committed
373

with the knowledge and on the instructions of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites"?
BUKHARIN: That I did not know.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, was this assassination committed
with the knowledge and on the instructions of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites"?
BUKHARIN: And I repeat that I do not know, Citizen Procurator.
VYSHINSKY: You did not know about this specifically in
relation to the assassination of S. M. Kirov?
BUKHARIN: Not specifically, but ...
VYSH INS KY: Permit me to question the accused Rykov.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, what do you know about the
assassination of Sergei Mironovich Kirov?
RYKOV: I know nothing about the participation of the Rights
or the Right part of the bloc in the assassination of Kirov.
VYSHINSKY: In general, were you aware of preparations for
terrorist acts, for the assassination of members of the Party and
the government?
RYKOV: As one of the leaders of the Right part of this bloc,
I took part in the organization of a number of terrorist groups and
fo preparations for terrorist acts. As I have said in my testimony1
I do not know of a single decision of the Right centre, through which
I was related with the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," about
the actual commission of assassinations ....
VYSHINSKY: About the actual commission. So. Do you know
that one of the aims of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was
to organize and commit terrorist acts against leaders of the Party
and the government?
.
RYKOV: I said more than that, I said that I personally organized terrorist groups. But you are asking me whether I knew of
such aims through some third person.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking whether the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" had any relation to the assassination of Comrade
Kirov.
RYKOV: I have no information regarding the relation of the
Right part to this assassination, and therefore I am convinced to
this day that the assassination of Kirov was carried out by the
Trotskyites without the knowledge of the Rights. Of course, I might
not have known about it.
VYSH INS KY: Were you connected with Yenukidze?
RYKOV: With Yenukidze? Very little.
VYSHINSKY: Was he a member of the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites"?
RYKOV: He was, since 1933.
374

VYSHINSKY: Which part did he represent in this bloc, the
Trotskyites or the Rights? To which did he gravitate?
RYKOV: He must have represented the Right part.
VYSHINSKY: Very well; please be seated. Permit me to
question the accused Yagoda. Accused Yagoda, do you know
that Yenukidze, of whom the accused Rykov just spoke, represented the Right part of the bloc and that he had direct
relation to the organization of the assassination of Sergei Mironovich Kirov?
YAGODA: Both Rykov and Bukharin are telling lies. Rykov
and Yenukidze were present at the meeting of the centre where
the question of assassinating S. M. Kirov was discussed.
VYSHINSKY: Did the Rights have any relation to this?
YAGODA: Direct relation, because it was a bloc of Rights
.and Trotskyites.
VYSHINSKY: Did the accused Rykov and Bukharin in particular have any relation to the assassination?
YAGODA: Direct relation.
VYSHINSKY: Did you, as a member of the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites," have any relation to this assassination?
YAGO DA: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Are Bukharin and Rykov telling the truth when
they say' that they knew nothing about it?
YAGODA: That cannot be so, because when Yenukidze told me.
that they, that is, the "bloc of Right~ and Trotskyites," had
decided at a joint meeting to commit a terrorist act against Kirov,
I categorically objected ....
VYSHINSKY: Why?
YAGODA: I declared that I would never permit any terrorist
.
.acts. I regarded it as absolutely unnecessary.
VYSHINSKY: And dangerous for the organization?
YAGODA: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Nevertheless?
·
YAGODA: Nevertheless Yenukidze confirmed ...
VYSHINSKY: What?
YAGOPA: That at ·this meeting they .•.
VYSHINSKY: Who were they?
YAGODA: Rykov and Yenukidze at first categorically objected ....
VYSHINSKY: To what?
YAGODA: To the commission of a terrorist act. But under
the pressure of the remaining part of the "bloc of Rights and Trotsky1·tes " ...
VYSHINSKY: Principally the Trotskyites?
YAGODA: Yes, under the pressure of the remaining part of

375

the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," they gave their consent. So
Yenukidze told me.
VYSHINSKY: After this, did you personally take any measures
to effect the assassination of Sergei Mironovich Kirov?
YAGODA: I personally?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, as a member of the bloc.
YAGODA: I gave instructions ...
VYSHINSKY: To whom?
YAGODA: To Zaporozhetz in Leningrad. That is not quite how
it was.
VYSHINSKY: We shall speak about that later. What I want
now is to elucidate the part played by Rykov and Bukharin in
this villainous act.
YAGODA: I gave instructions to Zaporozhetz. When Nikolayev
was detained . . .
·
VYSH INS KY: The first time?
YAGODA: Yes. Zaporozhetz came to Moscow and reported to
me that a man had been detained ...
VYSHINSKY: In whose briefcase ...
YAGODA: There was a revolver and a diary. And he released
him.
VYSHINSKY: And you approved of this?
YAGODA: I just took note of the fact.
VYSHINSKY: And then you gave instructions not to place
obstacles in the way of the murder of Sergei Mironovich Kirov?
YAGODA: Yes, I did.... It was not like that.
VYSHINSKY: In a somewhat different form?
YAGODA: It was not like that, but it is not important.
VYSHINSKY: Did you give instructions?
YAGODA: I have confirmed that.
VYSHINSKY: You have. Be seated.
THE PRESIDENT (to Vyshinsky): Have you any more questions?
VYSHINSKY: I have another question to put to Bukharin.
Was your attitude to terrorism positive or negative; to terrorism
against Soviet statesmen?
BUKHARIN: I understand. The question of terrorism arose
for the first time for me in a conversation with Pyatakov, and
I must say that I knew that Trotsky was insisting on terrorist
tactics. At that time I objected.
VYSHINSKY: When was that?
BUKHARIN: In the end Pyatakov and I found a common language under the formula that it would all work out in the end and.
that all differences would be ironed out in one way or another.
And then I have reported to you, Citizen State Prosecutor .. .
VYSHINSKY: You reported to the Court in my presence .. .
376

BUKHARIN: I reported to the Court in your presence that
actually the orientation on terrorism, strictly speaking, was
already contained in the Ryutin platform.
VYSHINSKY: I understand. I want to know whether your
attitude towards terrorism was a positive one?
·
BUKHARIN: What do you mean by that?
VYSHINSKY: That you were in favour of the assassination
of leaders of our Party and the government.
BUKHARIN: You ask whether I, as a member of the centre
of Rights and Trotskyites, was in favour of ...
VYSHINSKY: Terrorist acts.
BUKHARIN: I was.
VYSHINSKY: Against whom?
BUKHARIN :Against the leaders of the Party andthe government.
VYSHINSKY: You will tell us the details later. You came to
favour this roughly in 1929-30?
BUKHARIN: No, I think it was roughly in 1932.
VYSHINSKY: But were you not in favour of the assassination
of leaders of our Party and government in 1918?
BUKHARIN: No, I was not.
VYSHINSKY: Were you in favour of the arrest of Lenin?
BUKHARIN: His arrest? There were two such cases-about
the first of which I told Lenin himself; as to the second, I kept
silent about it for reasons of secrecy-regarding which, if you:
like, I can speak in greater detail. It did take place.
VYSHINSKY: Did it take place?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And about the assassination of Vladimir Ilyich?
BUKHARIN: The first time it was proposed to keep him under
restraint for twenty-four hours. There was such a formula. But in
the second case ...
VYSHINSKY: But if Vladimir llyich were to resist arrest?
BUKHARIN: But Vladimir Ilyich, as you know, never entered
into armed conflicts. He was not a brawler.
VYSHINSKY: And so you expected that when you came to.
arrest him, Vladimir Ilyich would not resist?
BUKHARIN: You see, I can mention the case of another man.
When the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries arrested Dzerzhinsky,.
he did not offer armed resistance either.
VYSHINSKY: That always depends upon the particular circumstances of the case. And so, in this case you counted that there
would be no resistance?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And did you not count upon the arrest of Comrade Stalin in 1918?
BUKHARIN: At that time there were several talks about .. ~
377

VYSHINSKY: I am not asking about talks, but about a plan
for the arrest of Comrade Stalin.
BUKHARIN: And I say that if I do not agree with your description of it as a plan, then permit me to prove to the Court
how it was in actual fact. Then, it may be said, it was not a
plan, but a talk.
VYSHINSKY: What about?
BUKHARIN: There was the same talk about the formation
Qf a new government of "Left Communists."
VYSH INS KY: And I ask you, did you have a plan for the arrest
Qf Comrade Stalin in 1918?
BUKHARIN: Not of Stalin, but there was. a plan for the
arrest of Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov.
VYSHINSKY: All three: Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov?
BUKHARIN: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: And so, not Comrade Stalin, but Comrades
Stalin, Lenin and Sverdlov?
BUKHARIN: Exactly.
VYSH INS KY: There was a plan of arrest?
BUKHARIN: I say that there was not a plan, but talks on
the subject.
VYSHINSKY: And what about the assassination of Comrades
Stalin, Lenin and Sverdlov?
BUKHARIN: Under no circumstances.
VYSHINSKY: I shall request the Court at the end of today's
session, or at the next session of the Court, to call as witnesses
-0n this question Yakovleva, a former active member of the group
-0f "Left Communists," Ossinsky and Mantsev, former active
members of the so-called group of "Ldt Communists,'' and then
the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, Karelin and Kamkov,
members of the Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, in order to question them whether Bukharin and the
"Left Communists," whom he headed at the time, together with
the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, had a plan, and what kind
-0f plan, for the arrest and assassination of Comrades Lenin, Stalin
.and Sverdlov. I have no more questions for the present.
BUKHARIN: May I begin?
THE PRESIDENT (after conferring with the Members of the
Court): The Court has decided to grant the request of the State
Prosecutor to summon as witnesses Yakovleva, Ossinsky, Mantsev,
Karelin and Kamkov.
VYSHINSKY: That fully satisfies me.
THE PRESIDENT: You have no more questions to put to
Bukharin for the present?
, VYSHINSKY: Not for the present.
378

THE PRESIDENT: I must explain to the accused Bukharin
'that it is not a speech for the defence he must make, nor a last plea.
BUKHARIN: I understand that.
THE PRESIDENT: And so, if you want to say anything about
your criminal anti-Soviet activities, you may do so.
BUKHARIN: I want to deal with the subject of the restoration
·of capitalism. May I?
VYSHINSKY: Of course, that is your chief speciality.
BUKHARIN: I want first to deal with ideological po~itions,
not in the sense of declining responsibility for practical, criminal
·counter-revolutionary activities. I have not the slightest desire
that the proletarian Court should conceive such an opinion. I want
to reply to the question which Citizen the State Prosecutor put to
Rakovsky, namely, for the sake of what did the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" carry on such a criminal struggle against the Soviet
power? I realize that I am not a lecturer and must not preach a
sermon here, but that I am an accused person who must bear responsibility as a criminal, facing the Court of the proletarian country.
But just because it seems to me that this trial is of public importance, and because this question has been dealt with extremely
little, I thought that it would be useful to dwell on the program
which has never been written down anywhere, on the practical
program of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," and to decipher
one formula, namely, what is meant by the restoration of capitalism,
in the way it was visualized and conceived in the circles of the "bloc
.of Rights and Trotskyites." I repeat that in desiring to dwell upon
this aspect of the matter I have no wish to disclaim responsibility
for various practical things, for my counter-revolutionary crimes.
But I want to say that I was not one of the cogs of counter-revolution, but one of the leaders of counter-revolution; and as one of the
leaders I play and answer in a far greater degree, bear far greater
responsibility than any of the cogs. And so I cannot be suspected
-Of wanting to wriggle out of or repudiate responsibility, even if
I were not a member of the Right and Trotskyite organization. The
-Court and the public opinion of our country, like the public opinion
()f other countries, as far as progressive mankind is concerned, can
judge how people sank to such depths, how we all became
rabid counter-revolutionaries, traitors to the Socialist fatherland,
and how we turned into spies, terrorists and restorers of
<:apitalism, and what, in the end, were the ideas and political
standpoint of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." We embarked
on treachery, crime and treason. But for the sake of what did
we embark on this? We turned into an insurrectionary band,
we organized 'terrorist groups, engaged in wrecking activities,
wanted to overthrow the valiant leadership of Stalin, the Soviet
government of the proletariat.
379

One of the very widespread replies is that through the logic of the
struggle we were forced to become counter-revolutionaries, plotters
and traitors, that we were led to the shame, to the crime, that has
brought us into the criminal dock. I need not say that such things do
not happen. in public life; here there is a logic, the logic of the struggle is combined with the methods of the struggle, with the platform.
I want to dwell on these facts, although I am convinced that
actually such a terminology may sound rather strange in relation
to such criminal activities, but nevertheless it seems important to
me to dwell on this.
It has been proved many times, and repeated tens of thousands
of times, that the Right deviation, from the moment of its inception, when it was still in an embryo, from the moment of
its inception set itself the aim of restoring capitalism. I do not
intend to speak about this. I want to speak of another aspect of
the matter, from a far more important standpoint, from the objective side of this matter, because here there arises the problem
of accountability and judgment from the standpoint of the crimes
revealed in Court, all the more so because I am one of the leaders
in the dock. We must here start from the beginning.
The Right counter-revolutionaries seemed at first to be a "deviation"; they seemed, at a first glance, to be people who began
with discontent in connection with collectivization, in connection with industrialization, with the fact, as they claimed,
that industrialization was destroying production. This, at a first
glance, seemed to be the chief thing. Then the Ryutin platform appeared. When all the state machines, when all the means, when
all the best forces were flung into the industrialization of the country, into collectivization, we found ourselves, literally in twentyfour hours, on the other shore, we found ourselves with the kulaks,
with the counter-revolutionaries, we found ourselves with the
capitalist remnants which sHll existed at the time in the
sphere of trade. Hence it follows that the basic meaning, the judgment, from the subjective standpoint, is clear. Here we went
through a very interesting process, an over-estimation of individual
enterprise, a crawling over to its idealization, the idealization
of the property-owner. Such was the evolution. Our program wasthe prosperous peasant farm of the individual, but in fact the
kulak became an end in itself. We were ironical about the collective
farms. We, the counter-revolutionary plotters, came at that time
more and more to display the psychology that collective farms were
music of the future. What was necessary was to develop rich property-owners. This was the tremendous change that took place
in our standpoint and psychology. In 1917 it would never nave
occurred to any of the members of the Party, myself included,
to pity Whiteguards who had been killed; yet in the period of the
380

.liquidation of the kulaks, in 1929-30, we pitied the expropriated
kulaks, from so-called humanitarian motives. To whom would it have
.occurred in 1919 to blame the d isloca ti on of our economic life on the
Bolsheviks, and not on sabotage? To nobody. It would have sounded
as frank and open treason. Yet I myself in 1928 in.vented the formula
.about the military-feudal exploitation of the peasantry, that is,
I put the blame for the costs of the class struggle not on the class
which was hostile to the proletariat, but on the leaders of the
proletariat itself. This was already a swing of 180 degrees. This
meant that ideological and political platforms grew into counterrevolutionary platforms. Kulak farming and kulak interests
.actually became a point of program. The logic of the struggle
led to the logic of ideas and to a change of our psychology, to the
counter-revolutionizing of our aims.
Take industry. At first we raised an outcry about over-industrialization, about over-straining the budget, and so on. But as
.a matter of fact this was a program demand, it was the ideal of
a kulak agrarian country with an industrial appendage. And
.psychologically? Psychologically, we, who at one time had advocated Socialist industrialism, began to regard with a shrug
-0f the shoulders, with irony, and then with anger at bottom, our
huge, gigantically growing factories as monstrous gluttons which
.consumed everything, deprived the broad masses of articles of
:~onsumption, and represented a certain danger. The heroic efforts
-0f the foremost workers ...
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, you have again not
understood me. You are not making your last plea now. You were
.asked to testify to your anti-Soviet, counter-revolutionary activities, but you are giving us a lecture. In your last plea you may
say whatever you like. I am explaining this to you for the third time.
BUKHARIN: Then permit me very briefly ...
VYSHINSKY: Tell me, accused Bukharin, how all this took
'Shape in practice in your anti-Soviet activities.
BUKHARIN: Then permit me to enumerate certain points of
program. And then I will immediately pass on to relate my practical
-counter-revolutionary activities. May I, Citizen the President?
THE PRESIDENT: Only more briefly, if you please. You
will have an opportunity to make a speech as your own Counsel
tor Defence.
BUKHARIN: This is not my defence, it is my self-accusation.
I have not said a· single word in my defence. If my program sta~d
were to be formulated practically, it would be, in the economic
sphere, state capitalism, the prosperous muzhik indivi.dual, the
-curtailment of the collective farms, foreign concessions, surrender
-0f the monopoly of foreign trade, and, as a result-the restoration
<>f capita~ism in the country.
381

VYSHINSKY: What did your aims amount to? What general
prognosis did you make?
.
BUKHARIN: The prognosis was that there would be a heavy
list towards capitalism.
VYSHINSKY: And what transpired?
BUKHARIN: What transpired was quite different.
VYSHINSKY: What transpired was the complete victory of
Socialism.
BUKHARIN: The complete victory of Socialism.
VYSHINSKY: And the complete collapse of your prognosis.·
BUKHARIN: And the complete collapse of our prognosis.
Inside the country our actual program-this I think must be said
with all emphasis-was a lapse into bourgeois-democratic freedom,
coalition, because from the bloc with the Mensheviks, SocialistRevolutionaries, and the like, it follows that there would be freedom
of parties, freedom of coalition, and follows quite logically from
the combination of forces for struggle, because if allies are chosen
for overthrowing the government, on the day after the possible
victory they would be partners in power. A lapse not only into.
the ways of bourgeois-democratic freedom, but in the political
sense into ways where there are undoubtedly elements of Caesarism.
VYSHINSKY: Say fascism simply.
BUKHARIN: Since in the circles of the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" there was an ideological orientation towards the kulaks
and at the same time an orientation towards a "palace revolution'~
and a coup d'etat, towards a military conspiracy and a praetorian
guard of counter-revolutionaries, this is nothing other than elements of fascism.
Since the features of state capitalism about which I spoke
operate in the sphere of economics ...
VYSHINSKY: In short, you lapsed into outright rabid fascism.
BUKHARIN: Yes, that is correct, although we did not dot
all the "i's." That is the formulation characterizing us as conspirators, restorers of capitalism, true from all points of view.
And quite naturally, this was accompanied by a disintegration
and degeneration of the whole ideology, our entire practice and
methods of struggle.
Now permit me to go straight on with an account of my criminal
activity.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps as a preliminary I might ask you two
or three questions of a biographical nature.
·BUKHARIN: By all means.
VYSHINSKY: Have you lived in Austria?
BUKHARIN: I have.
VYSHINSKY: For long?
BUKHARIN: 1912 to 1913.

382

VYSHINSKY: You had no connections with the' Austrian
police?
·
BUKHARIN: None.
VYSHINSKY: Have you lived in America?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: For long?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: How many months?
BUKHARIN: About seven months.
VYS.HINSKY: In America you were not connected with thepolice?<
BUKHARIN: Absolutely not.
VYSHINSKY: On your way from AmeriCa to Russia you
passed through ...
BUKHARIN: Through Japan.
VYSHINSKY: Did you stop there for long?
BUKHARIN: A week.
VYSHINSKY: You were not recruited during this week?
BUKHARIN: If it pleases you to put such questions ...
VYSHINSKY: The Code of Criminal Procedure gives me the
right to put such questions.
.
THE PRESIDENT: The Prosecutor has all the more right fo
put such a question because Bukharin is charged with attempting
to assassinate the leaders of the Party as far back as 1918, with
raising a hand against the life of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin in
1918.
VYSHINSKY: I am not overstepping the Code of Criminal
Procedure. If you like, you can say "no," but I may ask.
BUKHARIN: Quite right.
THE PRESIDENT: The consent of the accused is not required.
VYSHINSKY: You made no connections with the police?
BUKHARIN: Absolutely.
VYSHINSKY: Like Chernov in the bus. I am :asking you about
connections with some police authority.
BUKHARIN: I had no connections with any police authorities.
whatsoever.
VYSHINSKY: Then why was it so easy for you to join a bloc
which was engaged in espionage work?
BUKHARIN: Concerning espionage work I know absolutely
nothing.
VYSHINSKY: What do you mean, you don't know?
BUKHARIN: just that.
VYSHINSKY: And what was the bloc engaged in?
BUKHARIN: Two people testified here about espionage, Sharangovich and Ivanov, that is to say, two agents-provocateurs~
383

VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you consider Rykov an
agent-provocateur?
BUKHARIN: No, I do not.
VYSHINSKY (to Rykov): Accused Rykov, do you know that
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" conducted espionage work?
RYKOV: I know there were organizations that conducted
.espionage work.
VYSHINSKY: Tell me, did the Byelorussian national-fascist
-0rganization, which was part of your "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and which was led by the accused Sharangovich, conduct
espionage work?
RYKOV: I have already spoken about that.
VYSHINSKY: It conducted espionage work?
~KW:Y~.
·
VYSHINSKY: It was connected with the Polish intelligence
service?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You knew about this?
RYKOV: r did.
VYSHINSKY: And Bukharin did not know?
RYKOV: In my opinion, Bukharin also knew.
VYSHINSKY: So, accused Bukharin, it is not Sharangovich
who says so, but your pal Rykov.
BUKHARIN: Nevertheless I did not know.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Prosecutor, have you any more
-questions?
VYSHINSKY: I want to make myself clear to the accused
Bukharin. Do you understand now why I asked you about Austria?
BUKHARIN: My connection with the Austrian police consisted
in my imprisonment in an Austrian fortress.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Sharangovich, you were a Polish spy,
although you have been in prison?
SHARANGOVICH: Yes, although I have been in prison.
BUKHARIN: I have been in a Swedish prison, twice in a Russian
prison, and in a German prison.
VYSHINSKY: The fact that you have been in jail is no proof
that you could not have been a spy.
Accused Rykov, you confirm that after all his terms of confinement in the prisons of various countries, Bukharin, with you,
knew of Sharangovich 's spy connection with the Polish intelligence
service? Knew about it and approved of it?
RYKOV: I knew of organizations which conducted espionage
work.
VYSHINSKY: The fact that Bukharin had been in various
prisons did not prevent him fr.om approving his accomplices' connections with the Polish intelligence service. You understand this?
384

RYKOV: No, I do ttot.
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin understat1ds it.
BUKHARIN: I understand, but I deny it.
THE PRESIDENT: Continue.
BUKHARIN: I must speak briefly about Jhe various -stages.
Practically speaking, ·the foundations for my counter-revolutionary
activity as far as the Right deviation is concernedi its evolution
down to the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,'' with corresponding
methods of struggle, with corresponding criminal actions, were
laid deliberately as far back as 1919-20, when from my pupils at
the Sverdlov University I mustered a distinct group, which began
to develop very quickly into a faction. The membership of this
group is known. It is in the material of the investigation, and
as far as I can judge by the remarks of Citizen the Procurator
he has information on the subject.
_ VYSHINSKY: Among, your pupils was Slepkov, the man you
sent to the North Caucasus to organize insurrections?
BUKHARIN: Quite true. I can cite several more facts.
VYSHINSKY: Of the same kind?
BUKHARIN: No, not of the same kind.
VYSHINSKY: But of the same type?
BUKHARIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: Well, something similar to it?
BUKHARIN: Excuse me, I cannot explain everything in one
word.
VYSHINSKY: Continue.
BUKHARIN: A certain nucleus of cadres. was formed which
subsequently became one of the component parts in the aggregate
counter-revolutionary organization· of the Rights, and then, consequently, of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
About 1923 I wrote a so.:called memorandum, which was to
be handed to the Central Committee; however, l did not submit
it and it passed into circulation among the circles of this schObl
among whom certain views became. c~rrent which subsequently
grew, blossomed and bore correspondingly poisonous fruit. In
this memorandum. I said that in the leadership of the Party one
crisis would give place ...
VYSHINSKY: What you wrote in. it is not of the slightest
interest to us now.
BUKHARIN: In 1928, when elements of a crisis appeared in the
country in the relations between the prol_etariat and the peasantry,
and. the .Party )ea~~rship, h~aded by Stalin, mapped out a course
of overcoming the .diffic.ultiesand.of an offensive against the kulaks,
the opposition began to take shape-at .first only as an opposition. One of the episodes was that in that year -1 went to G. G.
Yagoda, then head of the O.G.P. U., to get tendentiously picked
25

385

data; he gave me suitably picked data, which 1 then used to fonrt
my counter-revolutionary ideology and corresponding actions
based on this ideology.
VYSHINSKY: When did your counter-revolutionary Right
organization take shape?
BUKHARIN: My rapprochement with Tomsky and Rykov
dates approximately to 1928-29-then contacts and sounding
out the then members of the Central Committee, illegal conferen_ces which were illegal in respect of the Central Commitee; consequently, the organization overstepped the bounds of Soviet state
legality, and it was on this basis that there quickly arose a peculiar organization of the leadership of the Right organization,
which may be depicted as a hierarchy, approximately like this:
the trio-Rykov, Tomsky and myself, who were members of the
Political Bureau at that time, opposition members of the Central
Committee who by virtue of thefr views had already developed
into a counter-revolutionary grouping; then various groupings,
the chief component parts of which should be listed as follows:
Bukharin and his notorious school in the first place, Tomsky
and his trade union cadres in the second place, Rykov and his
secretaries and people of the Soviet apparatus in the third place,
Uglanov with Moscow district officials and a group in the Industrial Academy in the fourth place. In this manner the upper
clique of this counter-revolutionary organization was formed.
VYSHINSKY: And where did Yagoda come in?
BUKHARIN: Yagoda stood aside.
VYSHINSKY: Was he connected with you?
BUK HAR IN: Yes, he was.
VYSHINSKY: He helped you to pick tendentious data?
BUKHARIN: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: So, he was a participant ...
BUKHARIN: I am speaking now about the hierarchy of the
leadership, and therefore as far as Yagoda ...
VYSHINSKY: I simply did not want the accused Yagoda to
be slighted.
BUKHARIN: Here began the quest for blocs. Firstly, my meeting with Karnenev at his apartment. Secondly, a meeting with
Pyatakov in the hospital, at which Kamenev was present. Thirdly, a meeting with Kamenev at Schmidt's country house.
I forgot to say that in 1928 on the basis of and in connection
with a statement made by representatives of a whole group in the
Central Committee, at that time an opposition group, but who were
already swinging to counter-revolutionary views, and on the basis
of a corresponding plan, I drew up the so-called platform of 1928.
I am mentioning it not because it was widely circulated and
not because its ideas, as you know, formed the basis of all practical

386

steps at that ti me and it became the principle underlying the
ideology, but because at the second sounding out of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite circles, namely at the meeting with Kamenev
and Pyatakov1 I showed the economic section of this platform to
the persons referred to.
I do not know whether you are in.terested in a detailed ...
THE PRESIDENT: I think these episodes could be related
more briefly.
BUKHARIN: Very well. The meeting with Kamenev at his
apartment. Here there were extremely slanderous conversations
abOut the leadership of the Party, the Party regime, the organization of hunger, civil war in the country, scurrilous attacks on
the Party leadership, and so on and so forth.
The meeting in the hospital. I repeat that inasmuch as the
economic platform met with some disparagement, no agreement
was reached on this occasion, but we sounded and tested each other,
and an attempt at an agreement was made.
Thirdly, and lastly, the meeting at the country house of Vasily
Schmidt, who was not there himself and at which myself, my
secretary Tseitlin, Kamenev and Tomsky were present. On this occasion the conversation was comparatively short and consisted in
a discussion of the tactics which we opposition members of the
Central Committee should pursue at the forthcoming Plenum of the
Central Committee. Kamenev's position was that of urging us on
to taking action, but we were also waiting for an opportunity. So
that r regard all these three attempts as quests for criminal connections and a criminal bloc against the Party leadership and the
Party with those circles which were grouped around Kamenev
and Zinoviev on the one hand, and the Trotskyite Pyatakov on the
other.
The next stage in the development of the counter-revolutionary organization of the Rights began in 1930-31. At that" time
there was a great sharpening of the class struggle, of kulak sabotage, kulak resistance to the policy of the Party, etc.
I consider this stage the transition to "double entry bookkeeping" all along the line. The trio became an illegal centre and
therefore, whereas this trio had previously been at the head of the
opposition circles, now it became the centre of an illegal counterrevolutionary organization. And inasmuch as they, I rep~at, we;e
illegal in relation to the Party, they became thereby illegal lil
relation to the Soviet authorities.
Close to this illegar centre was Yenukidze, who had contact
with this centre through Tomsky. Uglanov, whose influence in the
Party-organization was quite considerable because only a short
time back he had been leading the Moscow Party organization,
was also close to the centre at that time.
25*

387

Arourtd this time, approximately towards the end of 1931, the
members of the so-called school were transferred to work out-:
side of Moscow-to Voronezh, Samara, Leningrad, Novosibirskand this transfer was utilized for counter-revolutionary purposes
even then.
-VYSHINSKY: How was it utilized?
BUKHARIN: It was utilized in the sense that we members of
this illegal trio, members of the Right centre, myself amongthem,
gave these demoralized people a direct charge, a direct commission, primarily about recruiting people. As regards Yagoda, if
my memory does not fail me, according to A. I. Rykov he at that
time demanded a special status for himself, insisting on it particularly just then.
VYSHINSKY: A special status in what sense?
BUKHARIN: A special status within the Right organization
in the sense of specially secretive forms of concealment, which is
quite understandable in view of the position he held in the ()fficia l Soviet hierarchy.
VYSHINSKY: He gqt this status?
BUKHARIN: He got this status. About the autumn of 1932
the next stage in the development of the Right organization began,'
namely the transition to tactics of a forcible overthrow of Soviet
power.
VYSHINSKY: What year do you date it from?
BUKHARIN: I date it approximately from the summer of
1932. But, in general, Citizen State Prosecutor, I must say that
it should be borne in mind that all this division into periods is of
an arbitrary character, because, for example, if I take the fact of
Yakovenko's having been sent with my permission and thepermissioDi
of the Right centre, I have referred to facts concerning which you
have questioned me and concerning which I gave you an affirma.,
tive reply. They relate to an earlier period. From this I only draw
the conclusion that if dates do not coincide, this can in no wise
serve to disprove the criminal nature of one or another act, because
there was no clear line of demarcation here. Furthermore, in some
cases, as in the case of Yakovenko, there was such a hectic situation that it gave rise to a corresponding criminal reaction on
our part.
Proceeding to the tactics of forcjble overthrow in general,
I make note of the time when the so-called Ryutin platform
was formulated. Much has been said here about the Ryutin
platform, and perhaps there is no need to dwell upon it. It
was called the Ryutin platform for reasons of secrecy, as an
insurance against exposure; it was called the Ryutin platform
in order to conceal the Right centre and its top leadership.

388

Furthermore, I must say in addition: I think that the Ryutin
platform-that is why I permit myself to hold your attention
for a few minutes longer-the Ryutin platform, as far as I can
remember during the trial, the platform of the ·Right counterrevolutionary organization, was perhaps already actually a common platform of . the other groupings, including .the Kamenev.
Zinoviev and Trot~kyite groupings.
It was just at this very moment that the sifoation became such
that Trotsky had to throw off his Leftist uniform. When it came
to exact formulations of what had to be done after all, his Right
platform came i nt9 evidence at once, that is, he had to speak of
decollectivization, etc.
VYSHINSKY: That is, you equipped Trotskyism ideologically too?
.
.
BUKHARIN: Quite true. Here the correlation of, forces wai:;
such that Trotsky insisted on more drastic methods of struggle,
and we to a certain extent armed him ideologically. (To Vyshinsky.)
·
Is that all I need say about the Ryutin platform?
VYSHINSKY: That is your affair.
BUKHARIN: No, I am asking if it interests you or not.
VYSHINSKY: I am interested in your crimes.
BUKHARIN: Very well, but these crimes are so numerous,
Citizen Procurator, that it ·is necessary to pick out the most important.
VYSHINSKY: I am interested in all of them-not in a selection, but from beginning to end.
THE PRESIDENT: So far you are still beating about the bush,
:you are saying nothing about your crimes.
BUKHARIN: So you do not consider an illegal organization
a· crime, nor do you consider the Ryutin platform a crime?
VYSHINSKY: That is not the question, but you are told you
are beating about the bush.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, I request you not to
engage in cross-talk, but to speak if you want to speak.
BUKHARIN: I will speak.
,
THE PRESIDENT: According to procedure, the sessi-0n should
close"in fifteen minutes. I ask you to wind up y-0ur thoughts, or. to
fi'nlsh·.
..
··
- VYSHINSKY: You mentioqed Yagoda. I Would 1i.ke to questi"on Yagocla~ Accused Yagoda,- please tell ·us if. you -demanded of
the-~b-Ioc thal you should be put in a specially secret- position.
· YAGODA: Yes, there was such a. demand on my part.
VYSHINSKY: Do you remember under what circumstances
this took place and with whom you spoke about it?
YAGODA: I spoke with Rykov•'

389

VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, do you confirm this?
RYKOV: I confirm it, I have already spoken about this in my
preliminary testimony.
VYSHINSKY: Continue.
BUKHARIN: The Ryutin platform registered the transition
to the tactics .of overthrowing the Soviet power by force.
In this connection, I think I should dwell on the conference bf
1932. Those people who had been sent to various places outside
Moscow, consisting for the most part of "young people," returned
from their localities and on the initiative of Slepkov and with
my sanction called a conference at the end of the summer of 1932,
at which reports from the localities were made.
VYSHINSKY: Illegal?
BUKHARIN: Illegal. The conference was illegal, the work
was illegal, the reports were illegal and the reports were about
illegal work.
VYSHINSKY: The conference was counter-revolutionary, the
reports were counter-revolutionary, and the reports were about
counter-revolutionary work.
BUKHARIN: Yes, the whole thing was counter-revolutionary.
Incidentally, one of the points on the agenda of this conference was the question of the Ryutin platform, and the conference approved this Ryutin platform. After this there was a conference of the "trio," plus Uglanov. I was not present at this
conference because I was on my vacation, but when I returned from
my vacation I fully agreed with this platform and I bear full responsibility for it. The Ryutin platform was approved on behalf
of the Right centre. The essential points of the Ryuti nplatform were:
a "palace coup," terrorism, steering a course for a direct alliance
with the Trotskyites. Around this time the idea of a "palace
coupu was maturing in the Right circles, and not only in the
upper circles, but also, as far as I remember, among a section of
those working outside of Moscow. At first this idea came
from Tomsky, who was in contact with Yenukidze. This thought
occurred to Tomsky in connection with the possibilities of using
the official position of Yenukidze, who had charge of the Kremlin
guard at that time. Here we have the logic of the struggle and
the disappearance of avenues for legal work, the development
of this idea, the consolidation of the ties between TQmsky and
Yenukidze.- and between Rykov and Yagoda. Tomsky saio that
Yent1kidze agreed to take an active part in this coup. Tomsky also
$3.id that .ve·nukidze had enlisted Peterson. And here, speaking
~onically, from an academic formulation of the question, the
question matured into a practical formulation, because. el~ments
of the organization of this coup were present.

390

Consequently, it was already then that the plan was being
made and the organizational forces picked to carry it out, that is
to say, the recruiting of people for a "palace coup." This was
when the political bloc with Kamenev and Zinoviev originated.
In this period we had meetings also with Syrtsov and Lominadze.
I must say, only I ask the Court not to understand it as a desire
to mitigate the charges against me, that the political tendencies
in this group were not entirely undifferentiated, that the Rights
were not united with the Trotskyites: the Trotskyites counted
on terrorism while the Rights put their hopes in an i nsurrectionary
movement. The Rights urged the organization on to mass
actiori.
I think this is no mitigation, but in this case I am telling you
what took place and what was known from the reports which were
given then. We counted on enlisting the masses.
I had talks with Pyatakov, Tomsky and Rykov. Rykov had
talks with Kamenev, and Zinoviev with Pyatakov.
In the summer of 1932 I had a second conversation with Pyatakov
in the People's Commissariat of Heavy Industry. At that time this
was a very simple matter for me, since I was working under Pyatakov. At that time he was my boss. I had to go into his private
office on business, and I could do so without arousing suspicion.
Neither did the fact that I would sit in his private office for so
long arouse any suspicion. There was no telling. what business
had to be transacted.
VYSHINSKY: You made use of all the legal opportunities
for illegal conversations.
BUKHARIN:. I utilized legal opportunities for anti-Soviet,
illegal purposes. In this talk, which took place in the summer of
1932, Pyatakov told me of his meeting with Sedov concerning
Trotsky's policy of terrorism. At that time Pyatakov and I considered that these were not our ideas, but we decided that we
would find a common language very soon and that our differences
in the struggle against Soviet power would be overcome. Tomsky
and Rykov, I may be mistaken, spoke with Kamenev and Sokolnikov. I remember that at that time Tomsky particularly insisted
on a coup d'etat and a concentration of all forces, while the members of the Right centre orientated themselves on an insurrectionary
movement.
By the end of 1932-the Ryutin platform dates to the autumn
or the end of the summer of 1932, the conference dates ...
THE PRESIDENT: The session is drawing to a close,
conclude.
391

BUKHARIN: Then I wi II merely conclude the thought that
the counter-revolutionary bloc of Rights, Trotskyites and KamenevZinovievites was formed at the end of 1932.
THE PRESIDENT: The Court is adjourned until March 7,
I I a.m:
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegiurn of
the Szipreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER
Military Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, MARCH 7, 1938

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Courtiscoming, please
rise.
- THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Bukharin, continue your testimony about your antiSoviet activities.
BUKHARIN: Very well. The day before yesterday I finished
by- saying that at the end of 1932 the bloc of Rights, Trotskyites and Zinovievites was formed on the basis of the Ryutin
platform. By that time terrorist sentiments had already begun to
develop among the participants of the counter-revolutionary organization of the Rights. They were to be marked among my so-called
disciples, in the Matveyev group surrounding Uglanov, among
Rykov's supporters and among certain trade union functionaries, as was at one time disclosed in the press. The formation
of the group of conspirators in the Red Army relates to that
period. I heard of it from Tomsky, who was directly informed of it
by Yenukidze, with whom he had personal connections, and with
whom in addition it was more convenient for him to be in contact
because they lived along the same corridor in the Kremlin.
Both of them, Tomsky and Yenukidze, as I heard-though
"h_eard" is not a particularly suitable word; rather I was informed
by-Tomsky and Yenukidze, who told me--that in the upper ranks
of the Red Army the Rights, Zinovievites and Trotskyites had
then _tinited.iheir forces;· names were mentioned to ·me-I don't
vouch that I .reme111ber them all exactly-but those I have remembered are Tukhach·evsky, Kork, Primakov and Putna.
__ Jhus the ~onnection,§ wit_h the .centr-e Qf _the Rights_ followed
the l_ine of:_t_he-mjlitary group, -Yenukidze, Tom"sky-(,l:_nd t]l-e- re.st~
Approximately at this time, i.e., towards the_ end of 1932 or.
the beginning of 19~3,_, th~ .s~-c~lled__ co~t'!:ct_ ~en~re ~as fo~med,
which- _included representatives of vanous antt-l>q.rty counter._ _
revo1litfonary trends, including the- Rigtits. . : _ _
<> _ Ii:t retum!i:ig to the story or to the evi_dem~e regarding the
criminal activity:of .the coun.ter-revolutio_nary Right bloc, I wish
firStiy to deal with the idea ·of the coup d'etat as one of the central
criminal id~as; ·and the practical preparations ·that corresponded
to -it~ because this very idea-a-nd the--corresponding practical prep-

393

arations developed in conformity with various periods and the
general political situation in the various stages of its development.
Theinceptionoftheideaofthecoup d'etat among us Right conspirators relates approximately to the years 1929-30, and at that
time this coup d'etat in its embryo form was conceived, or
rather was spoken of, as a coup d'etat on relatively a very narrow
basis. I would say that it was an idea of a circumscribed coup
d'etat, or rather of a "pa lace coup" (I again fear to say so, lest
the impression be got that I wish to shirk responsibility here),
and was for the first time expressed by Tomsky in connection
with the circumstance that at that time Yenukidze, who was personally connected with Tomsky and was frequently in his company,
had charge of the Kremlin guard; at the same time there was a
possibility for Rykov, who was Chairman of the Council of People's
Commissars, to make use of his official position. In this connection
there were a number of legal opportunities and loopholes facilitating all kinds of secret criminal activities, and therefore this
could serve as a definite condition under which this "palace
coup" could be effected. It dates approximately to the years
1929-30, but at that time they did not proceed to carry the "palace
coup" into effect, and did not do so, strictly speaking, for
two reasons: the one reason was a wider one ...
VYSHINSKY: Why they did not proceed to put it into effect
is not so interesting as why they did; why they did not, why
it did not take place, is of no interest to us.
BUKHARIN: Very good, I shall not dwell on this if it is not
of interest.
VYSHINSKY: You have already reached the year 1933.
BUKHARIN: The reason I wanted to refer to this question
is that it is connected with the practical preparations ....
VYSH INS KY: So speak of the practical preparations, instead
of telling us why this or that did not take place. The Court.is interested in knowing what took pl.ace, and why.
BUKHARIN: Yes, but every negation contains an affirmation, Citizen Procurator. Spinoza once said that in the sphere
of determination .•.
VYSHINSKY: Speak concretely: how were you preparing the
seizure of power, with whose aid, by what means, with what aims
·
·
and objects in view?
·~:BUKHARIN: Since we did not undertake a "palace coup"
fot reasons which you are not interested in listening to here, we
proceeded to orientate ourselves on kulak revolts .. : .
VYSHfNSKY; What is the meaning o~ the expression "palace
394

coup"? Am I to understand that this means the direct seizure
of power, the seizure of power by the forces of your bloc?
BUKHARIN: Absolutely correct; politically-by the forces
of the bloc. But why do I say "palace coup"? This means by
forces organizationally concentrated in the Kremlin.
VYSHINSKY: By such forces as would prove to be at your
disposal, but not necessarily by forces that were in the
Kremlin?
BUKHARIN: Absolutely correct.
VYSHINSKY: Then would it not be better to speak not of
a "palace coup,,, but of an attempt to seize power by means of
an armed uprising?
BUKHARIN: No, it is not quite correct to speak of an armed
uprising.
VYSHINSKY: Why not? You wished to seize power with
arms in hand?
BUKHARIN: An armed uprising is a mass affair, while here
it was a matter of a narrower . . .
VYSHINSKY: What masses? You had no masses with you.
BUKHARIN: Consequently it is not an uprising.
VYSHINSKY: An uprising with the aid of a group.
BUKHARIN: If you choose to define an uprising by a group
as an uprising, then it is correct.
VYSHINSKY: In any case, it is more correct than to speak
of a "palace coup," which is supposed to take place in some
palace.
BUKHARIN: When speaking of a "palace coup," I had
in view . . .
VYSHINSKY: A group of plotters?
BUKHARIN: Absolutely correct.
VYSHINSKY: I believe it will be better to call it so. Tell
me, how did you prepare the group of plotters for the seizure
of power?
BUKHARIN: That refers to the following period. Perhaps
you will allow me to relate the facts in chronological order, as
I have my material arranged, at first about the "palace coup,"
then the transition to an uprising, from an uprising to, strictly
speaking, a coup d'etat.
VYSHINSKY: Tell me, what was the main object of the group
of plotters in this sphere?
BUKHARIN: Even at that period the main object was the
overtliro:.v of the Soviet government by force.
•
VYSHINSKY: Well, tell us then how you were prepanng
for the overthrow of -the Soviet government by force.
BUKHARIN: At that period we were already discussing the

395

question of the overthrow of the Soviet government by force,
with the aid of a group of military participants in the plot. VYSHINSKY: A group?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: A group of participants· in your plot?·
BUKHARIN: Absolutely correct.
.
VYSHINSKY: In the persons of Tukhachevsky, Primakov and
some others?
.
BUKHARIN: There was the Yenukidze group as well.
VYSHINSKY: We have already spoken of the Yenukidze
group.
BUKHARIN: Absolutely correct. In 1931-32, in connection
with the changed political situation, the main stress was laid on
the development of the insurrectionary movement, and the counter~
revolutionary Right organization, headed by the centre of the
Rights, provoked several kulak revolts which, Citizen Procurator,
were already dealt with in part when you questioned me in
connection with Yakovenko, Slepkov, etc.
VYSHINSKY: On your direct instructions and. under your
leadership?
BUKHARIN: Absolutely correct. I can mention here yet another
fact which has not been referred to. At that time I spoke about
myself. I sent Slepkov to prepare a kulak revolt in the Kuban.
Rykov sent Eismont to the Caucasus, and he entered into connections with the Right-winger Pivovarov and the Trotskyite Beloborodov; this has been referred to during the Court investigation.
In addition I can tell· the Court that I was informed by P. Petrovsky and Zaitsev of kulak sabotage as a sort of· preliminary
stage preceding sharper forms of struggle.
VYSHINSKY: In so far as you have mentioned Eismont, I
ask you to testify regarding your connections with Whiteguard
circles and German fascists.
.
BUKHARIN: I don't understand what you have in view.
VYSHINSKY: I repeat, tell the Court of your conne~tions,
of c.onnections between your conspiratorial group and Whiteguard
circles abroad and the German fascists. Js the question clear?· ....
BUKHARIN: I do not know of this. In any case, :J _don't
remember.
·
···
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): -Allow me -t-0 :_ask Rykov·. Did
you hear my qi.:estion? What C!in you say, in tJ1is -r'.egard? · ·. · .' ·
RYKOV: ·~ knew from PiVo'Q:arov that._"the Coss·ack Leag1:1e,
organized on the instructions, on .the. advice_' Of Slepkov' . ·
VYSHINSKY: The Whiteguard Cossack -League?
RYKOV: Yes . . . . That through the re-emigrants who mad~ up
the forces ..of this· counter-revoh1t.i0nary' organi'zation,.. "it· was

3'96

connected with the remnants ot the Cossack emigres abroad, and
this connection was facilitated by the aid received from the
German fascists.
VYSHINSKY: So that the group of conspirators in the N·orth
Caucasus, of which you knew from Pivovarov's words, was· in
contact with the Whiteguard Cossack League abroad, and with
the German fascists.
RYKOV: Yes, that's so.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, did you know of this, did
you know Pivovarov?
BUKHARIN: I did not know Pivovarov.
VYSHINSKY: What was Pivovarov's position in the North
Caucasus?
BUKHARIN: He was at the head of Soviet state power in the
North Caucasus.
VYSHINSKY: So you knew that Pivovarov wac; Chair11J.an of
the Territorial Executive Committee in the North Caucasus?
BUKHARIN: ·1 knew that he was Chairman of the Terrl.torial
Executive Committee, but I did not know him personally ..
VYSHINSKY: Rykov knew that Pivovarov was the head ofa
local group of traitors and counter-revolutionaries in the North Caucasus, and that he was connected with Whiteguard Cossack circles
abroad, but you, Bukharin, did not know this?
BUKHARIN: I don't dispute the possibility of such a fact,
but I did not know it.
VYSHINSKY: Was it ·a fact, or was it not, that Pivova"rov
was connected with Whiteguard Cossack circles abroad?
BUKHARIN: I cannot deny it. I can only conjecture that it
could be so, since our line was to make use of. all forces. ·
VYSHINSKY: Including Whiteguard forces as well?
BUKHARIN: That was not excluded.
VYSHINSKY: Was that clear to you?
BUKHARIN: I don't deny that this was possible, but I cannot
recall ·it with a sufficient degree of exactitude, there is not the
material in my min.d to enable me to remember about connectioQs with the Whiteguard Cossack League abroad.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, was there such a fact as the one
mentioned by Rykov, who knew of it as one of the leaders of
your organization?
BUKHARIN: There is no such fact in my mind. But I cannot
deny the possibility of such a fact. What is more, it is very
likely that such connections existed.
VYSHINSKY: You :wish to present matters as if you were not
practically concerned with these crimes.
BUKHARIN: How so, when I sent Yakovenko to Siberia to

397

organize armed kulak insurrections, and sent Slepkov to the
North Caucasus for the same purpose?
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, did Bukharin know of this
fact, or did he not?
RYKOV: The initiative of the organization of this League,
according to Pivovarov, belonged to Slepkov, who was sent to the
North Caucasus by Bukharin, and who, I presume, was given
definite instructions and directives by Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: So then, Slepkov was sent to the North Caucasus
on Bukharin's initiative. Accused Bukharin, do you confirm this?
BUKHARIN: I sent Slepkov there as an individual skilled
in the organization of the insurrectionary movement. But once
he got there, found his bearings and learnt what organizations
there were, Slepkov could undertake certain steps without me.
VYSHINSKY: Do you bear responsibility for these criminal
acts as one of the leaders of the organization?
·
BUKHARIN: Undoubtedly I do bear responsibility.
VYSHINSKY: For the connections of your organization with
Whiteguard Cossack circles and German fascists?
BUKHARIN: Of course I do.
VYSHINSKY: Was there such a fact?
BUKHARIN: If others say that there was such a fact, then
there was.
RYKOV: I categorically assert that such a commission was
given, that Slepkov was seht to the North Caucasus because he
played an important role and was able to gather a counter-revolutionary organization together. I do not know whether he spoke
to Bukharin on this point, but the initiative there, according to
Pivovarov, belonged to Slepkov.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, these connections followed Bukharin's line?
RYKOV: The idea followed Bukharin's line.
VYSHINSKY: The idea and the practical application of it.
RYKOV: Slepkov did it.
BUKHARIN: I don't deny having sent Slepkov there. I sent
him to establish contact with Whiteguard Cossack circles.
VYSHINSKY: Was this included in the plan of your leadership?
BUKHARIN: I did not specifically say so.
VYSHINSKY: Do you assert that you were unaware of the
contacts with German fascists and Whiteguard Cossack circles?
BUKHARIN: I did not know.
VYSHINSKY: Rykov knew, Slepkov knew, but you did not?
BUKHARIN: They were there on the spot.
VYSHINSKY: Did you send Slepkov there?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I did.
398

VYSHlNSKY: Were you cortrteded ·with Slepkov when he 1.VaS
there?
BUKHARIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk to him about what he did there?
BUKHARIN: Later on?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, later on.
BUKHARIN: We had no detailed conversation.
VYSHINSKY: But did you meet him?
BUKHARIN: I met him once.
VYSHINSKY: You met once, and this was enough to enable
you to discover whether he had fulfi lied your commission or not.
BUKHARIN: No, we did not speak about it.
VYSHINSKY: Tell me, what was the subject of your conversation?
BUKHARIN: We talked very little.
VYSHINSKY: You sent Slepkov to organize a kulak insurrection. Slepkov engaged in the organization of this insurrection
and worked in this direction.
BUKHARIN: He did not give me a detailed reply.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, was this so or not?
BUKHARIN: I sent him.
VYSHINSKY: Did he fulfil your instructions?
BUKHARIN: Apparently he did.
VYSHINSKY: Apparently?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: But did he speak to you about it?
BUKHARIN: I say that I met him once.
VYSHINSKY: Did Slepkov tell you how he had fulfilled your
commission?
BUKHARIN: 1 don't remember his having said much.
VYSHINSKY: But why do you say that he did not speak in
detail?
BUKHARIN: He spoke in general.
VYSHINSKY: He spoke in general?
BUKHARIN: Yes, in general.
VYSHINSKY: If he spoke in general, then he spoke?
BUKHARIN: If he spoke in general, then he spoke.
VYSHINSKY: But you have only just said that he did not
speak.
BUKHARIN: He did not speak in detail.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, accused Bukharin, did you send
Slepkov to organize Whiteguard kulak insurrections?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did he inform you how he had fulfilled your
commission?
BUKHARIN: He did not say how he had fulfilled it.

399

VYSHINSK.Y: l3ut lw' did he fulfil it?
BUKHARIN: He said that there were disorders there.
VYSHINSKY: Not i· surrections, but disorders?
BUKHARIN: The conversation rapidly passed to another
topic, about the prep,<!rations for the conference in 1932.
VYSHINSKY: Your conversations of course· passed very rapidly from one topic to another. ·
·
It is important for me to establish that at that time in the
North Caucasus there was a part of your Right-wing plotting
organization.
BUKHARIN: Yes:
VYSHINSKY: So it is a fact?
BUKHARIN: It is.
VYSHINSKY: That you knew about it?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: That you sent Slepkov there to establish contact with this organization. That Slepkov did something there in
this direction of which he spoke to you. . . . Is that a fact?
BUKHARIN: It is.
VYSHINSKY: That there were kulak disorders there. Is that
a fact?
BUKHARIN: It is.
VYSHINSKY: That this was connected with his activity. Is
that a fact?
BUKHARIN: It is.
VYSHINSKY: And was connected with your activity. Is that
a fact?
BUKHARIN: It is.
VYSHINSKY: Further, it is known that this North Caucasus
group was in contact with Whiteguard Cossack emigre' circles . . . .
Is that a fact or not?
BUKHARIN: I have told you that I cannot deny this· _fact,
Citizen Procurator.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, is it a fact .or not that a
group of your confederates in the North Caucasus was connected
with Whiteguard emigre Cossack circles abroad? ls that. a fact
or not? Rykov says it is, Slepkov says it is. .
BUKHARIN: If Rykov says it is, I have no grounds for noi
believing him.
_
·
VYSHINSKY: Can you answer me without philosophy?
BUKHARIN: This is not philosophy.
VYSHINSKY: Without philosophical twists and turns .
.. BUKHARIN; I have testified that I had explanatidns on, this
question.
VYSHINSKY: Answer me "No."

400

BUKHARIN: I cannot say ''No," and I cannot deny that it
did take place.
VYSHINSKY: So the answer is neither "Yes" nor "No"?
BUKHARIN: Nothing of the kind, because facts exist regard·
less of whether they are in anybody's mind. This is a problem of
the reality of the outer world. I am no solipsist.
VYSH INSKY: So that regardless of whether this fact entered
your mind or not, you as a plotter and leader were aware of it?
BUKHARIN: I was not aware of it.
VYSHINSKY: You were not?
BUKHARIN: But I can say the following in reply to your
question:·since this thing was included in the general plan, I consider it likely, and since Rykov speaks of it in a positive fashion,
I have no grounds for denying it.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, it is a fact?
BUKHARIN: From the point of view of mathematical probability it can be said, with very great probability, that it is a
fact.
VYSHINSKY: So that you are unable to give a plain answer?
BUKHARIN: Not "unable," but there are some questions
that cannot be answered outright "Yes" or "No," as you are
perfectly well aware from elementary logic.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to ask Rykov again: was Bukharin
aware of this fact?
RYKOV: I did not speak to him about it.
VYSHINSKY: Now, did Bukharin know about it or not?
RYKOV: I personally think with mathematical probability
that he should have known of it.
VYSHINSKY: That's clear. Accused Bukharin, were you aware
that Karakhan was a participant in the conspiratorial group of
Rights and Trotskyites?
BUKHARIN: I was.
VYSHINSKY: Were you aware that Karakhan was a German
spy?
BUKHARIN: No, I was not aware of that.
VYSHINSKY (to Rykov): Were you aware, accused Rykov,
that Karakhan was a German spy?
RYKOV: No, I was not.
VYSHINSKY: Were you not aware that Karakhan was engaged
in negotiations with certain German circles?
.
RYKOV: Negotiations regarding the centre of the Rights?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, of course, regarding the centre of tht!
Rights.
RYKOV: Yes, yes.
VYSH!NSKY: Treasonable negotiations?
26

401

RYKOV: Treasonable.
VYSHINSKY: With whom did he conduct these negotiations,
with what institution?
RYKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: Well?
RYKOV: I don't know that.
VYSHINSKY: In that case, tell the Court: what was the line
of the negotiations?
RYKOV: The line was ... At that time negotiations were conducted with German government circles.,
VYSHINSKY: With which circles?
RYKOV:. On the question of their attitude to the Rights, to
a possible coup d'etat by the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: Were there negotiations regarding the organization of the defeat of the U.S.S.R., or not?
RYKOV: I don't know that.
VYSHINSKY: Then I wish to remind Rykov of the following
testimony given by him at the preliminary investigation-Vol. l,
p. 112: "Consequently not only the Tukhachevsky group, which was
a component part of our organization, worked to prepare the defeat of the U.S.S.R. This defeat was prepared for by our entire international orientation and Karakhan's negotiations." Is that correct?
RYKOV: It is.
VYSHINSKY: Then what follows from this?
RYKOV: I had in view defeat not in the direct sense of the
word: I had in view that if a group of plotters in any country engages in negotiations with the enemy, then, firstly, the very fact
of these negotiations in itself must assist in hastening warthe enemy will the sooner undertake his offensive the more support
he has within the country-and, secondly, the ability of the country
to defend itself, and of the other to attack, correspondingly changes, that is, the defence weakens while the offensive becomes stronger.
VYSHINSKY: So then this fact took place?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And further: "In our very international orientation, our starting point was that we needed to receive support
from the international bourgeoisie, and we linked up our activity
and the success of our counter-revolutionary work in the U.S.S.R.
with direct aid from fascism." In brackets it states: "Karakhan's
negotiations." Can the conclusion be drawn from this that Karakhan, with your knowledge, engaged in negotiations ·with fascist
circles regarding support for your treasonable activity on definite
conditions? Was that the case?
· ·
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And what were the conditions?
402

RYKOV: t'irstly, a number of economic concessions, and
secondly the so-called dismemberment of the U.S.S.R.
VYSHINSKY: What does that mean? ·.
:
RYKOV: That means the separation of the-national :republics
and placing them under a protectorate, or making them dependent,
· ··
formally not dependent, but actually dependent on . . .
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, territorial concessions?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Did -Karakhan propose in the name of your
bloc to cede to the Germans some part of the territory of the
Soviet Union?
RYKOV: The matter was somewhat different.
VYSHINSKY: I speak of the meaning of these concessions.
RYKOV: I myself did not meet Karakhan. I know this from
Tomsky, who explained it in my presence and in that of Bukharin.
·
VYSHINSKY: So that means Bukharin also knew? Allow me
to ask Bukharin. Did you know?
BUKHARIN: I did.
RYKOV: He explained it in this way: the German fascists
accept these conditions, i.e., privileges as regards concessions, trade
agreements, etc., but on their part they demand that the national republics be given the right to free separation. ·
VYSHINSKY: Well, and what does that mean?
. RYKOV: It was not what we proposed. This was a new demand
on the part of the Germans. In plain language, this means, of course,
the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R.
. VYSHINSKY: That is to say, handing over part of the U.S.S.R.
to the Germans?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, you were aware that Karakhan,
with your knowledge, engaged in negotiations with German circles
to hand over part of the U.S.S.R. Precisely what part?
RYKOV: There was no talk about that.
·
VYSHINSKY: Did your plan include a point about severing
the Ukraine for the Germans, or did it not?
RYKOV: I personally cannot say about the Ukraine, I repeat,
not because we were against the Ukraine being severed.
VYSHINSKY: But were you against or for its being severed?
RYKOV: There was simply no- talk among us about the Ukraine
being severed, and the question was not decided then.
-VYSHINSKY: Did you have in view severin~ the Ukraine
in favour of German fascism?
· RYKOV: Such was the formula.
VYSHINSKY: Not a formula-but in practice?
~*

~3

RYKOV: In practice the question at issue could be that of
Byelorussia.
VYSHINSKY: And of the Ukraine?
RYKOV: No. We could not decide this question without the
consent of the Ukrainian counter-revolutionary organizations.
VYSHINSKY: Then I address myself to the accused Bukharin.
Did you in 1934 engage in negotiations with Radek on this subject?
BUKHARIN: Not negotiations, but conversations.
VYSHINSKY: All right, conversations. Did they take place ornot?
BUKHARIN: They did, only not about that.
VYSHINSKY: Then about what?
BUKHARIN: Radek told me of his negotiations with Trotsky,
that Trotsky had engaged in negotiations with the German fascists
regarding territorial concessions in return for help to the counterrevolutionary organizations.
VYSHINSKY: That's it, •that's it.
BUKHARIN: I then objected to Radek.
VYSHINSKY: Did Radek tell you that on Trotsky's instructions the Ukraine was to be ceded, yielded to the Germans?
BUKHARIN: I definitely remember about the Ukraine.
VYSHINSKY: Were there such conversations or not?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And about the Far East?
BUKHARIN: About the Ukraine I definitely remember; there
was talk of other regions, but I do not remember which.
VYSHINSKY: You testified as follows: "Trotsky, while urging the intensification of terrorism, yet considers the main chance
for the advent of the bloc to power to be the defeat of the U.S.S.R.
in a war against Germany and japan at the cost of territorial concessions (the Ukraine to the Germans, and the far East to the Japanese)." Was that so?
BUKHARIN: Yes, it was.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, these are the concessions?
BUKHARIN: I was not in agreement.
VYSHINSKY: Further it states: "I did not object to the ·idea
of an understanding with Germany and japan, but did not agree
with Trotsky on the extent."
BUKHARIN: Read the next phrase as well, where the extent
and character are explained.
VYSHINSKY: I have read and want to speak about this.
BUKHARIN: I said I was against territorial concessions.
VYSHINSKY: No. I want to speak about this. And so Radek
told you that Trotsky gave instructions to cede the Ukraine
to the Germans. Did he say this?
BUKHARIN: He did, but I did not consider Trotsky's in·
structions as binding on me.
404

VYSHINSKY: Was Rykov aware of this conversation with Radek, or not?
RYKOV: Whom are you asking?
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin.
BUKHARIN: I don't remember whether I told Rykov.
VYSHINSKY: And Rykov?
RYKOV: He did not tell me.
VYSHINSKY: .Consequently you were unaware of Bukharin's
conversation with Radek?
RYKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: But did he talk privately to Bukharin?
RYKOV: Who?
VYSHINSKY: Radek. Accused Bukharin, how did Radek talk
to you? What post did you occupy at that time?
BUKHARIN: It is not a matter of the post.
VYSHINSKY: What post did you occupy?
BUKHARIN: I was the editor of the "Izvestia."
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk to Radek as the editor of the "Izvestia," or as a member of the plotting organization?
BUKHARIN: You understand perfectly well that I spoke to
him as a member of the plotting organization.
VYSH INSKY: Rykov and Tomsky then constituted the centre,
and under these conditions you said nothing of this conversation
with Radek?
BUKHARIN: Excuse me, I wish to answer this question. I cannot answer every question in one word. I do not possess sufficient ability for that.
The conditions under which we met were of a conspiratorial
character, since we hardly met together at all, but spoke from
time to time, making use of meetings in corridors, in the streets,
etc. rt may have happened that I did not tell him of this conversation. I say this not in order to whitewash Rykov; it is to
be explained by the conspiratorial methods that existed in the
organization of the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: Do you deny that you passed on to Rykov such
a serious conversation as the one you had with Radek? Did you
not tell Rykov about your serious conversations with Radek?
BUKHARIN: Citizen Procurator, I did not consider Trotsky's
directions as obligatory for us all.
VYSHINSKY: I am not speaking of directions, but of conversations.
BUKHARIN: I do not remember and therefore cannot say
whether I spoke of this. I don't remember this.
VYSHINSKY: You do not deny, but you don't remember.
I will. ask Rykov. Accused Rykov, when you spoke of dismember..
m~nt 1 which parts of the U.S.S.R. did you hav~ in mind?

405

- RYKOV: When .Tomsky reported on the additional demands
of the German fascists to the Rights, we accepted this .proposal
in the main in its general form. __ . _
VYSHINSKY: What was in question_ here, .or what parts of
the U.S.S.R.?.
.
RYKOV: There was no specific talk regarding which republics,
which parts of the U.S.S.R.
VYSHINSKY: At the prelim_inary investigation, and here in
Court, you testified that Karakhan engaged in negotiations with
the German fascists regarding help for your plot. Was that a
fact or was it not?
RYKOV: Regarding help for the plot? If political aid is meant,
then it was to secure a favourable attitude towards it.
VYSHfNSKY: fn return for what?
RYKOV: I have already enumerated.
VYSHINSKY: Territorial concessions. What part of ·the
U.S.S.R. did this concern?
RYKOV: We did not specify this.
VYSHINSKY: You did not define this?
RYKOV: No, we did not.
VYSHINSKY: But did you have a definite part of the U.S.S. R.
in mind or not? Or did you speak in the general abstract?
RYKOV: What happened was what I have already stated.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say?
RYKOV: We accepted conditions favourable to the practical
activity of the centre of the Rights. This was put into effect
in our work, in our guidance regarding Byelorussia .
. VYSHINSKY: So then the Germans were concerned about
._
Byelorussia? For whose benefit?
-RYKOV: I cannot say what the Germans were concerned about.
VYSHINSKY: They were concerned that you might band over
Byelorussia to whom? Not to the Germans?
RYKOV: To the Poles.
VYSHINSKY: But what about the Germans? It would appear
that the Germans were fussing around for the .benefit pf others.
For whom? The Poles? The Germans render you a service, and in
return for this you hand over Byelorussia to the Poles. They turn
out to be i"n a ridiculous position.
RYKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: I revert to the first question. Consequently,
Karakhan engaged in negotiations with the Germans. Apparently
this took place with the knowledge of your blo.c. Did_ Bukharin
_
·
know of this?
RYKOV: Tomsky told me an.d Bukharin of this.
-VYSHINSKY: So; then, was Bukharin aware of this?
Accuse·d Bukhaiin, were you awai·e of this?

406

BUKHARIN:· Citizen Procurator, I have alread.y_ said twice
that I was.
VYSHINSKY: Did you endorse this?
BUKHARIN: What exactly does ''this'' mean?
VYSHfNSKY: What you have already said twke.
BUKHARIN: I did not endorse it. At the preliminary investigation f gave detailed testimony to the effect that Karakhan ...
VYSHINSKY: Did you endorse it?
BUKHARfN: I was faced with the fact itself, because I\arakhan ...
VYSHINSKY: Did you endorse these negotiations conducted
by Karakhan with the German fascists?
BUKHARIN: Citizen Procurator, I say that this was a political fact.
VYSHINSKY,: Did you endorse Karakhan 's negotiations with
the German fascists on· behalf of the bloc?
BUKHARIN: In general, as regards the negotiations ...
I endorsed, that is to say, consid~r~d it expedient ...
VYSHINSKY: Not in general, but the negotiations conducted
by Karakhan?
BUKHARIN: I have already explained to you, Citizen Procurator, that the situation was such that Karakhan went without
a preliminary decision of the joint centre and returned . . .
VYSHINSKY: Were you aware that Karakhan was engaged in
negotiations with the German fascists?
·
BUKHARIN: f was. I knew of this from Tomsky, from Karakhan himself ...
VYSHINSKY:· Did you endorse these negotiations?
BUKHARIN: Or disavow? I did not disavow them; consequently I endorsed them.
·
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, did you endorse them, or not?
BUKHARIN: I repeat, Citizen Procurator: ·since I did not
disavow them, I consequently endorsed them.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you endorsed them?
BUKHARIN: If f did not disavow them, consequently I endorsed them.
_
·
·
VYSHINSKY: That's what I am asking you: that is to say
you endorsed them?
·
. BUKHA.RIN: So then "consequently" is the same as "that
is to say.''
VYSHINSKY: What do you mean, "that is to say"?
BUKHARIN: That is to say, I endorsed them.
VYSHINSKY: But you say-that you learnt ·of this post fac.
tum.
BUKHARIN: Yes, the one does not contradict the other in
the slightest.

401

VYSHINSKY.: Allow me to question the accused Rykov.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, did Karakhan undertake these
negotiations on his own initiative?
RYKOV: He undertook them on the instructions, on the
initiative of Tomsky. But Bukharin and f endorsed this initiative
when these negotiations were reported to us.
VYSHINSKY: Did you endorse not only the fact of the negotiations but also the initiative, that is, the affair as a whole?
RYKOV: We are neither of us little children. If you don't
endorse such things, then you must fight against them. One cannot
play with neutrality in such things.
VYSHINSKY: And so it can be established that Karakhan
conducted negotiations with the German fascists with Bukharin's knowledge. Accused Rykov, do you confirm this?
RYKOV: Yes.
BUKHARIN: What is the meaning of "with Bukharin's knowledge"? It was not the case that I knew that he· was going
there.
VYSHINSKY: I am not speaking about his going there. Do
you know what initiative means? ...
BUKHARIN: I can guess vaguely ..
VYSHINSKY: Vaguely? I see that your position compels
you to guess vaguely about very clear things.
BUKHARIN: Possibly.
.
VYSHINSKY: The accused Rykov has just testified to the Court
in your presence that Karakhan began negotiations with the Germans not on his own initiative, but on that of Tomsky.....
BUKHARIN: But then neither Rykov nor f knew of this.
VYSHINSKY: But when you learnt later, did you endorse it?
BUKHARIN: Rykov has already stated that in such cases
there can be no such thing as neutrality: if I did not put an end
to them, then I endorsed them. But this is a paraphrase of what
I said: if I did not disavow them, I endorsed them.
VYSHINSKY: And so, accused Bukharin, you bear responsibility for these negotiations of Karakhan with the Germans?
BUKHARIN: Undoubtedly.
VYSHINSKY: For the negotiations regarding the preparations
for defeat?
BUKHARIN: The question was not put that way.
VYSHINSKY: Regarding. help to you?
BUKHARIN: In general I spoke of help ... of neutralization ...
VYSHINSKY: Rykov has already explained to you.
BUKHARIN: It seems to me that he is explaining to the
Court, and not to me.

408

VYSHINSKY: He explained that the very fact of the negotiations with the enemy means assisting him.
BUKHARIN: Well, yes, in that sense, but I draw a differ:ence-that was not how the question was dealt with from the
legal aspect, because ...
VYSHINSKY: How was help to have been rendered? In assisting the success of the conspiracy?
BUKHARIN: During the conspiracy there might be German
intervention against us in general. ...
That has to be neutralized, and that means help.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, that they should help you to
maintain power.
BUKHARIN: To neutralize them and thereby to help us in
maintaining power.
VYSHINSKY: At the price of certain concessions?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: The accused Rykov stated that at that period
the question of severing Byelorussia was discussed. ls that how
I am to understand it?
BUKHARIN: My impression of it is quite a different one.
RYKOV: Tomsky informed us that the Germans had told
Karakhan that, in addition to economic concessions, the German
fascists insisted on the national republics being given the right
of secession. We immediately understood and interpreted it as
meaning the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, as meaning the surrender of
Byelorussia?
RYKOV: And thereupon, as far as I remember (and one must
not and cannot forget such things), we accepted it in this general
form.
VYSHINSKY: Who is meant by "we"?
RYKOV: I, Bukharin and Tomsky.
VYSHINSKY: Is that correct, accused Bukharin?
BUKHARIN: Not altogether, not about Byelorussia, but about
the Ukraine.
VYSHINSKY: So, now it's about the Ukraine. But till now
we were dealing with Byelorussia?
BUKHARIN: You have not questioned me on this point, so that
logically there is nothing contradictory in what I say.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to show the accused Rykov his testimony, Vol. I, p. 119, where it says: "I must, however, say that
the question of the orientation on Poland with a view to securing
her support in case of our advent to power arose considerably
earlier, namely, in 1930-3 l." Do you confirm this?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin, do you confirm this?
40~

BUKHARIN: I don't know and d.on 't remember this:
VYSHfNSKY: Accused Rykov, :whom ·did you have in rriind
when·you referred to this question?
RYKOV: I referred to my relations with the representatives of
the Byelorussian organization.
VYSHINSKY: But did you not discuss ttiis question with
Bukharin?
RYKOV: I cannot assert that.
VYSHINSKY: Then allow me to read out your further testimony:
"At that period this question was on several occasions the subject of.discussion between myself, Bukharin and Tomsky, on the one
hand," etc. Thus I ask you: so you did dis_cuss this question
with Bukharin?
RYKOV: "This question" meant the agreement with. the
counter-revolutionary Byelorussian organization. Perhaps I did
not express myself quite correctly, but that was what I had in
view.
VYSHINSKY: Apparently you had in view what was in view.
Here it is clearly stated that the question of an orientation on
Poland was discussed in 1930-31. And further it states: "In this
period," that is, precisely at that time, this question; that is, the
question of the orientation on Poland.
RYKOV (after a silence): There is no such thing in my
testimony, perhaps there is some other word. . ..
VYSHINSKY: Here every word plays a big part.
RYKOV: That is absolutely correct.
VYSHINSKY: It says outright: at that period this question,
that is, the question which was spoken of before, the question of
the orientation on Poland. Please read it. (Rykov is handed his testimony given at the preliminary investigation.)
·
RYKOV: Here it states: "At that period this question . . . "
this refers to the whole of the previous paragraph, and not to the
last phrase of the paragraph at all.
VYSHINSKY: I read further: "The general formula we then
agreed on amounted to this, that in the negotiations with the Poles,
with whom contacts had already been restoFed by that time through
Chervyakov, we would agree to the Byelorussian Soviet Republic
being severed from the U.S.S.R."
Is that so? With whom did you discuss this question?
· RYKOV: I discussed this with Goloded and Chervyakov, they
.·were aware of the matter.
. VYSHINSKY: They were aware of the matter? And was Bukh·
arin aware of it?
BUKHARIN: I did not meet Chervyakov.
VYSHINSKY: That you didn't meet Ch€rvyakov is not the

4lQ

point. I am speaking of Rykov. ! submif to him these three
paragraphs from his testimony. The first reads: "I must, however, say that the question of the orientation on Poland was repeatedly discussed in 1930-31." The second paragraph: "In
this period, i.e., in the period 1930-31, this question, i.e., the
question spoken of previously, the question of the orientation on
Poland, was on several occasions a subject of discussion between
myself, Bukharin, Tomsky and Chervyakov, former Chairman
of the Central Executive Committee of Byelorussia. Chervyakov
has been a covert, but exceptionally active participant of the Right
organization since 1928." The third paragraph: "The general formula we then agreed on amounted to this, that in the negotiations with the Poles, with whom contacts had already been restored
by that time through Chervyakov, we would agree to the Byelorussian Soviet Republic being severed from the U.S.S.R."
Do you confirm this?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHfNSKY: Accused Bukharin, did you know of all this?
BUKHARfN: fn 1930 such a question could not arise. Hitler
was not yet in power at that time.
VYSHfNSKY: But this question was raised. The history of
your treachery did not begin with Hitler,
BUKHARIN: That is true.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have conversations with Rykov and
Tomsky in 1930-31?
BUKHARIN: I don't remember.
VYSHINSKY: Now Rykov testifies to the fact that there were
such conversations. 1 ask you, were there such conversations or
not? Yes or no?
BUKHARIN: And I say I don't remember. I have the right to
tell the Court not what you want, but what really happened.
VYSHINSKY: I don't demand ·t11is of you. ·
BUKHARIN: I -have -the right to say to the Court, and do
s_ay,: I don't remember.
VYS}:IINSKY: You don't remember? Accused Rykov, what
do you say?
RYKOV: The ·first report of this was made by Tomsky; he
referred to Chervyakov, who had been at his country house. And
then the three of us discussed this question on the strength of
Tomsky's report and adopted this proposal regarding contact with
the counter-revolutionary Byelorus-sian organization. At any rate
it was in Bukharin's presence.
VYSHINSKY: Since this was in Bukharin's presence, Bukharin knew of it.

Allow me to address myself to Sharangovich, one of the leaders
of the Byelorussian underground organization of plotters. Accused
Sharangovich, what have you to say in this regard?
SHARAN GOVI CH: Both Goloded and Chervyakov informed
our organization of this line, as of an accomplished fact. Besides, I must say that Tomsky never figured in conversations regarding this line; Rykov and Bukharin were mentioned.
fn addition, Chervyakov had several conversations with Bukharin,
after which he not only informed me, but informed our organization, at a meeting of the centre, making reference to Bukharin
and Rykov.
VYSHINSKY: The following paragraph from Rykov's reply:
"There were several variations which consisted exactly in this.
The idea was to give this compensation to Poland in the
event of our coming to power in war time. The factors giving
rise to the war, the attack by the imperialist powers (Poland
and Germany), the war we were engineering in order to come to
power, we did everything possible to sharpen and stimulate this
factor in all our practical activities."
Do you confirm this testimony of yours?
RYKOV: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Whom did you have in view?
RYKOV: I had in view the centre of the Rights.
VYSHINSKY: Whom personally?
RYKOV: I have already said quite a lot about this.
VYSHINSKY: I want you not to be ashamed and to say it
here.
RYKOV: I had Bukharin in mind. The centre consisted of three
persons: myself, Bukharin and Tomsky. Consequently this refers
to Bukharin as well.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently this refers to Bukharin as well?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHJNSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you confirm this?
BUKHARIN: In general the centre possessed such a line.
VYSHINSKY: The next paragraph of Rykov's reply, page
120, reads as follows: "Chervyakov developed exceptionally intensive work in Byelorussia in his relations with the Poles. He
was connected with them in his illegal activities. He drew all
the practical conclusions from these instructions of ours.'' Do you
confirm this, Rykov?
RYK OV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, Chervyakov and the people connected with you maintained systematic connections with the
Poles?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHlNSKY: They were executing your instructions?

412

RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Isn't this art espionage connection?
RYKOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: What kind of connection is it?
RYKOV: There was an espionage connection there, too.
VYSHINSKY: But was there an espionage connection maintained by a part of your organization with the Poles on your instructions?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Espionage?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin included?
RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Were you and Bukharin connected?
RYKOV: Absolutely.
VYSHINSKY: So you were spies?.
RYKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: And the organizers of espionage?
RYKOV: I am in no way better than a spy.
VYSHINSKY: You organized espionage, so you were spies.
RYKOV: It may be said, yes.
VYSHINSKY: It may be said, spies. I am asking, did you
organize connections with the Polish intelligence service and the
respective spy circles? Do you plead guilty to espionage?
RYKOV: If it is a question of organization, then in this case,
of course, I plead guilty.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you plead guilty to
espionage?
BUKHARIN: I do not.
VYSHINSKY:. After what Rykov says, after what Sharangovich says?
BUKHARIN: I do not plead guilty.
VYSHINSKY: When the organization of the Rights was set
up in Byelorussia, you were at the head of it; do you admit that?
BUKHARIN: I have told you.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you, do you admit it or not?
BUKHARIN: I took nn interest in Byelorussian affairs.
VYSHINSKY: Did you take an interest in espionage affairs?
BUKHARIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: And who did take an interest?
BUKHARIN: I received no information with regard to activities of this kind.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, was Bukharin receiving any information with regard to activities of this kind?
RYKOV: I never spoke to him about it.
VYSHINSKY: What do you mean, you never spoke? And what
413

about your conversation with Bukharin cortcerning the· espionage
connections of the Byelorussian organization with the Poles?
RYKOV: In this conversation there was no special emphasis
put on its being an e~pionage conn~ction.
_·
VYSHINSKY: I am speaking of the nature of the connection,
of its essence.
_
·
RYKOV: It was inevitable. Under these conditions, any kind
of connection with the Poles automatically and inevitably-and
everybody understands that-very rapidly develops into espionage
connections.
·
VYSHINSKY: Not only was it inevitable that they should develop, but they did develop?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSH INS KY: UQ.der your leadership?
RYKOV: I mean to say that we did not personally direct this
development; however, it i.s not a question of direct leadership
but of general leadership. We absolutely and definitely bear responsibility for this.
VYSHINSKY: There is no point in making a pious face, accused Bukharin. Better admit what exists. And what exists is the
following: you had a group of your accomplices, fellow-conspirators in Byelorussia, headed by Goloded, Chervyakov and Sharangovich. Is that right, Sharangovich?
SHARANGOVICH: It is.
VYSHINSKY: And on Bukharin's and Rykov's instructions,
and under their leadership, you established connections with the
Polish intelligence service and with the Polish General Staff? ls
that right, Sharangovich?
SHARANGOVICH: Absolutely right.
VYSHINSKY: Under your leadership also with regard to the
espionage connections. Is that right, Sharangovich?
SHARANGOVICH: Absolutely right.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, who was the organizer of the espionage in which you engaged?
SHARANGOVICH: Rykov, Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, they were spies.
SHARANGOVICH: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: just as ...
SHARANG6VICH: As I myself.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated. (To Rykov.) Accused Rykov, did Goloded tell you in 1932 that all more or less important appointments
of people to responsible posts in Byelorussia were first co-ordinated with the Polish intelligence sel"Vice?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did Bukharin know of this?
RYKOV: I cannot say.
414

. . VYSHlNSKY: ·You do rtot know? You do rtot want to betray
your pal?
RYKOV: What I mean to say is that in those cases when I know
that he is not telling- the truth, I am exposing him, but in those
cases whenJ do not know, I cannot and shall not do it.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you with regard to the fact that the
Poles were giving their consent to the various appointments to official po_sts in Byelorussia. Was this known to your leading centre?
RYKOV: I knew of it. As for Bukharin, I riever spoke to him
about it. I also knew that Chervyakov and Goloded maintained
connections, not only with me, but with Bukharin and Tomskv
as well. Whether or not they spoke of this to Bukharin I canno·t
say, because ·1 was not present at those conversations.
VYSHINSKY: Do you think that it would have been natural
for Goloded to speak to Bukharin about this question? Or did they
have to keep it a secret from Bukharin?
.
RYKOV: I think that, naturally, he spoke to. Bukharin, but
what they talked about I do not know.
.
_
VYSHINSKY: I shall ask you now by way of making a.supposition: do you suppose that Bukharin knew of this?
RYKOV: This circumstance ... I prefer to speak ~rnly of what
I know; and as to what I do not know-my position in this Court
room is not .such as to allow. me to advance suppositions.
VYSH.INSKY; And did you have any conversations with Bukharin about the affairs of the conspiracy in. Byelorussia?
RYKOV: The only conversation which took place and which
I remember-perhaps there were others but I have no recollection
of them-that 'was during the early stage of our relations, which
sprang up as a result of Tomsky's information.
·
VYSHINSKY: Why, you yourself said that even during the
period of 1931 there were several occasions when you and Bukharin spoke about ·these questions. I have just reminded you of
pages 119-20 of the case.
RYKOV: But the conversations related not -0nly to what you
are asking about ...
VYSHINSKY: Did you speak to Bukharin on several occasions?
RYKOV: About the fact that there was an organization in
Byelorussia, that work was already being carried on ....
VYSHINSKY: What kind of work?
.
RYKOV: Counter-revolutionary work in support of our ...
VYSHINSKY: Which included also espionage work?
. RYKOV: I do not recall any conversations dealing especially
with t_his espionage work.. I. do not exclude the possibility that
there.·were such conversations, but I do not remember.
VY-S,HINSKY: Tell us, please,, were there any instructions re-

415

ceived from the Poles with regard to undermining the defence
capacity?
.
RYKOV: I know of two cases. You asked me the same question
two sessions before this. l mentioned two cases which are known
to me-these refer to horses and road-building. You asked, why
road-building? I answered: apparently in order to impede the movement of our troops.·
VYSHINSKY: Did Bukharin know of this? Of this instruction
of the Polish intelligence service to disrupt and destroy our defence
capacity?
RYKOV: This question, like the previous ones, I cannot answer.
VYSHINSKY: Were you aware of the treasonable activities
of the Polish spy Ulyanov?
RYKOV: Iwas.
VYSHINSKY: Did Bukharin know about it?
RYKOV: I do not know.
VYSHINSKY: Were you aware of the treasonable activities
of the Polish spy Benek?
RYKOV: I was.
VYSHINSKY: Was Bukharin aware of it?
RYKOV: I do not know.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me then, Comrade President, to read
page 127 of the record which contains the following question to
Rykov and his reply: "Question: With regard to being informed
of and directing the activities of your organization in Byelorussia, you are talking all the time almost exclusively about yourself;
but what was the role of the other members of the centre? Answer:
What I have deposed here ... " And what you deposed there was
about Benek, about Ulyanov, about the instructions of the Poles
concerning undermining the defence capacity, about the appointment of official persons with the knowledge of the Polish intelligence service-did you depose that?
RYKOV: And something else besides.
VYSHINSKY: Did you depose that?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: "What I have deposed here was, of course,
known to the other members of the centre, to Bukharin and Tomsky." Do you confirm this?
RYKOV: This refers to all our relations with Byelorussia.
VYSHINSKY: No, you will not wriggle out of this, 1 shall
read further. . . . "What I have deposed here," and what you
deposed here refers to the Polish instructions to damage the strategical means of communication-this is on page 123 of the record,
it refers to the treasonable espionage work of Benek-page 124 of
the record, it refers to the treasonable espionage work of Ulya416

rtov-pages 125 and 126 of the record. Finally, this is page 127,
where it says: "from Chervyakov's information I retained in memory
the most important thing, namely, that the leadership of our
organization in Byelorussia received active assistance from the
Polish intelligence service in corrupting the revolutionary
movement in Western Byelorussia," etc. And the question: "You
are talking about yo~rself, but tell us about your accomplices who
knew about this." The answer: "The other members of the centreBukharin and Tomsky-knew of it too."
RYKOV: You have there the word "obviously." It implies
that this is a supposition on my part, that my certainty is not based
on direct facts.
VYSHINSKY: I asked you and you answered that you preferred
to talk about the things which you knew.
RYKOV: But I made the reservation there-"obviously.,,
VYSHINSKY: In this case, I shall read on: "Bukharin and
Tomsky knew ... " Here you do not say "obviously," but you
say, Bukharin and Tomsky knew, Schmidt was partly initiated
into these affairs-you are referring to Vasily Schmidt-"But I
dwelt more on my own role for the reason that, by a decision of
the centre, the main connections with the Byelorussian anti-Soviet organization of the Rights were concentrated in my hands.,,
Is this clear?
RYKOV: It is clear to me.
BUKHARIN: I was not asked a single word about this durin~
the preliminary investigation, and you, Citizen Procurator, aid
not question me for three months, not a single word.
VYSHINSKY: I am questioning you now. This is my right.
BUKHARIN: But at the preliminary investigation ..•
VYSHINSKY: Be so kind as not to instruct me how to conduct
::i. preliminary investigation, the more so since you do not understand a thing about it. You understand more about the affairs for
which you find yourself in the dock.
BUKHARIN: Possibly.
VYSHINSKY: Was the accused Rykov, by your decision, put in
charge of the connections with the coun.ter-revolutionary organizations?
BUKHARIN: In a general way, he was put in charge.
VYSHINSKY: And your status was that of a secret member?
BUKHARIN: Inside there was no status of secrecy.
VYSHINSKY: With regard to connections with the Byelorussian group?
BUKHARIN: Generally everything was done with secrecy.
VYSHINSKY: But your status was that of particular secrecy?
BUKHARIN: This term cannot be applied here, it does not fit.
27

417

VYSHINSKY: Oo you want to argue about the term'?
BUKHARIN: No, I do not want to argue, on the contrary,
I keep silent.
VYSHTNSKY: I ask the Court to authenticate this. What I have
cited here is fully identical with what was written in the original
record signed by Rykov. And I request that this be presented to
Rykov so that he may identify his signature.
RYKOV: I do not deny it.
VYSHINSKY: The word "obviously" refers to the previous
sentence, but with regard to Bukharin there is no "obviously."
"Bukharin and Tomsky knew, Schmidt was partly initiated."
THE PRESIDENT: I corroborate that these quotations correspond to the original record which has Rykov's signature on each
page.
RYKOV: I affirm that the word "obviously" refers to what
has been read.
VYSHINSKY: The word "obviously" is not there.
RYKOV: My deposition-"Bukharin and Tomsky knew, Schmidt
was partly initiate!l "-should be understood with the word "obviously." I am not a very good stylist. If I said the word "obviously" in the first sentence, and the second sentence represents a paraphrase of the first sentence, the word "obviously" is implied.
VYSHINSKY: According to your supposition, did Bukharin
know of these espionage connections, or did he not?
RYKOV: He should have known, but in less detail and in fewer particulars than r knew. But which details, which particulars, which facts out of those I related and knew in greater detail
than he, that I cannot tell.
VYSHfNSKY: ff by the decision of the centre you were entrusted with maintaining the connections with the Byelorussian group,
that means that you knew all the details of the connections.
RYKOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Through the connections which yau maintained
you should have known everything.
RYKOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Through the connections which you maintained
you should have known everything you were doing.
RYKOV: I should have known what I was doing? I don't
understand what you are driving at.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you, were you supposed to know
what you were doing?
RYKOV: What I was doing?
VYSHINSKY: Of course.
RYKOV: That is to say, you are asking me whether I was in
a sta~e of consciousness or unconsciousness? Always in a state of
consciousness.
418

VYSHINSKY: And did Bukharin know everything?
RYKOV: I did not speak to Bukharin about details.
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you about details but about
the substance. Did Bukharin know the substance?
RYKOV: Bukharin was informed about the substance of the
connection and knew about it.
VYSHINSKY: That is what I wanted to establish. Permit me
to consider it established that Rykov and Bukharin knew the
substance of the treasonable connection which included espionage.
Is that correct, Rykov?
RYKOV: That is, espionage followed.
BUKHARIN: So it appears that I knew something from which
something followed.
VYSHINSKY: You will argue it out at leisure.
RYKOV: I am afraid that there will be no leisure.
VYSHINSKY: That is for the Court to decide. I have no more
questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharl'TI, proceed.
BUKHARIN: In 1933-34 the kulaks were already smashed,
an insurrectionary movement ceased to .be a real possibility,
and· therefore in the centre of the Right organization a period
again set in when the orientation toward a counter-:revolutionary
conspiratorial coup became the central idea. Thus, from a "palace
coup," from a combination of a coup with a mass insurrection,
and from an orientation toward a mass insurrection with the corresponding practical conclusions, we passed on to counter-revolutionary plotting pure and simple. And the central idea became that
of a coup d'etat which was to be accomplished by means of an armed
. conspiracy.
The forces of the conspiracy were: the forces of Yenukidze
plus Yagoda, their organizations in the Kremlin and in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs; Yenukidze also succeeded
around that time in enlisting, as far as I can remember, the former
commandant of the Kremlin, Peterson, who, apropos, was in his
time the commandant of Trotsky's train.
Then there was the military organization of the conspirators:
Tukhachevsky, Kork and others.
VYSHINSKY: What year was that?
BUKHARIN: I think it was in 1933-34.
VYSHINSKY: And at the same time you carried on negotiations of a defeatist and treasonable nature with Khodjayev?
BUKHARIN: I had one single talk with Khodjayev in 1936.
VYSHINSKY: In 1936. And what was this talk about?
BUKHARIN: Which-this?
VYSHINSKY: The one you had with Khodjayev.
BUKHARIN: In 1936?
27*

419

VVSHtNSkY: Yes.
BUKHARIN: Properly speaking, 1heard Khodjayev 1s evidente,
I heard what he sz..id in Court, and I have quite a number of corrections to proffer to what was said.
VYSHINSKY: First we shall deal with those matters which
require no corrections, and you will proffer your corrections
later.
BUKHARIN: As you say.
VYSHINSKY: Did you tell Khodjayev that there already
existed an agreement with fascist Germany?
BUKHARIN: No, I did not.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to question the accused Khodjayev.
Accused Khodjayev, did Bukharin talk with you?
KHODJAYEV: Yes, he did.
VYSHINSKY: How, when, where, and about what specifically?
KHOO JA YEV: It was in the month of August, when Bukharin came to Tashkent ....
VYSHINSKY: Recount briefly what you have stated in Court.
KHODJAYEV: I gave my testimony during the prelimi-nary
investigation, I also gave it in Court. The conversation between
me and Bukharin took place at my country house in Chimgan.
BUKHARIN: I stated the same.
KHODJAYEV: After reviewing the international situatior of
the U.S:S.R., after reviewing the situation in various European
countries-I spoke about this in detail in my preliminary testimony-and then after reviewing the internal situation of the
Soviet Union, Bukharin said that it was necessary so to direct· our
activities that these activities should help to bring about the clefeat·
of the Union.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, he considered this a natural
process?
KHODJAYEV: According to what he said, the internal and
international situation were leading up to this. He said that
we, the Rights, had an agreement with fa£cist Germany, and
that we were planning an agreement with japan.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, were you with Khodjayev at
his country place?
BUKHARIN: I was.
VYSHINSKY: Did you carry on a conversation?
BUKHARIN: I carried on a conversation and kept my
head on my shoulders all the time, but it does not follow from
this that I dealt with the things of which Khodjayev just spoke;
this was the first conversation ....
VYSHINSKY: It is of no consequence whether it was the first

420

or not the first. Do you confirm that there was such a conversation?
BUKHARIN: Not such a conversation, but a different one,
and also secret.
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you about conversations in
general, but about this conversation.
BUKHARIN: In Hegel's "Logic" the word "this" is considered to be the most difficult word ....
VYSH INS KY: I ask the Court to explain to the accused Bukharin
that he is here not in the capacity of a philosopher, but a criminal,
and he would do retter to refrain from talking here about Hegel's
philosophy, it would be better first of all for Hegel's philosophy •...
BUKHARIN: A philosopher may be a criminal.
VYSHINSKY: Yes, that is to say, those who imagine themselves to be philosophers turn out to be spies. Philosophy is out
of place here. I am asking you about that conversation of which
Khodjayev just spoke; do you confirm it or do you deny it?
BUKHARIN: I do not understand the word "that." We haa
a conversation at the country house.
VYSHINSKY: What is there that you can't understand? The
conversation, the contents of which were here related by Khodjayev. Is this clear?
BUKHARIN: If you are referring to the contents of the conversation, then the conients were somewhat diffuent; but this
conversation at the country house did take place.
VYSHINSKY: What different contents?
BUKHARIN: It was the first time in my life that I spoke to
Khodjayev about politics. This explains the nature of the conversation. I told him that it was necessary for us to be prepared to
overthrow the Soviet government by forcible means, and that for
this purpose it was necessary to take advantage of possible mass
movements which mi·ght occur there. Secondly ...
VYSHINSKY: What has that got to do with the agreement with
fascist Germany?
·
BUKHARIN: I said nothing about an agreement.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Khodjayev, did Bukharin speak about
an agreement?
KHODJAYEV: I confirm that he said the things of which he
spoke here, but immediately after that he spoke about an agreement
with Germany.
VYSHINSKY: Was there any talk about England?
KHODJAYEV: Yes, there was. He said that an agreement with
England was being considered and that the Right centre would,
on its part, take measures to efkd i.his agnement, and that we,
the centre of the nationalist organization of Uzbe.kistan, must, on
our part, also take the necessary steps in this direction.
421

VYSHINSKY: Namely?
KHOO JAYEV: In the sense of establishing connections with
the British resident agents.
VYSHINSKY: Through whom?
KHOO JAYEV: With regard to t?e questi?n of "t_hrough whom,"
we, myself and Bukharin, estabhshed this not m the sense of
an instruction but merely in the course of the conversation.
VYSHINSKY: It was a consultation?
KHOOJAYEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you confirm this part of
Khodjayev's evidence?
BUKHARIN: I told Khodjayev that in our foreign political
orientation we must make use of all keys, including the British.
VYSHINSKY: So you spoke not about a British orientation,
but about British keys?
BUKHARIN: ff it pleases you, about British keys.
· VYSHINSKY: And could you say it in plainer words?
BUKHARIN: In foreign policy we orientated ourselves exclusively on the neutralization of Japan and Germany and on their
assistance, which, however, did not preclude the necessity of
taking advantage of the international contradictions ....
VYSHINSKY: Toward whom did you consider it necessary to
orientate yourselves?
BUKHARIN: I beg your pardon, it is I who am speaking and
not you.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, do not forget that it
is not you who regulates the questions and answers here.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you: what was your opinion?
Towards whom were you to orientate yourselves?
BUKHARIN: I told him that it was necessary to take advantage of the .international contradictions ....
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you confirm Khodjayev's
evidence?
BUKHARIN: I said that we would have to deal with various
foreign states, and that it was impossible to deal with only one
group, but that it would be necessary to deal with the others as
well.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you did tell Khodjayev that it would
be necessary to orientate yourselves towards certain foreign states?
BUKHARIN: You see, I gave up using the expression "orientation" because of its ambiguity, and therefore I am making
it more precise ....
VYSHINSKY: Well, now make it more preGise.
BUKHARIN: I told him. . .
·
VYSHINSKY: Was there any talk of England?

422

BUKHARIN: There was.
VYSHINSKY: Was there any talk of japan?
BUKHARIN: There was.
VYSHINSKY: Was there any talk o(Germany?
BUKHARIN: There was.
VYSHINSKY: Was there any talk to the effect that it was
necessary to utilize both the ones and the others in the interests
of your struggle against the Soviet government?
BUKHARIN: The question was not put that way. After all,
it was the first time I spoke to Khodjayev.
VYSHINSKY: And you spoke of overthrowing the Soviet government this first time!
BUKHARIN: Yes, for a very simple reason. There is nothing for you to gesticulate about.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, do not forget where
you are now.
BUKHARIN: This conversation was carried on in terms which
spelt absolute secrecy, and not a single word was said ....
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you about terms, I am asking
you about the contents of the conversation.
BUKHARIN: I am using the same words which I used in
my testimony during the preliminary investigation ....
VYSHINSKY: But I am not speaking about words. I will
be compelled to cut the interrogation short because you apparently are following definite tactics and do not want to tell·
the truth, hiding behind a flood of words, pettifogging, making
digressions into the sphere of politics, of philosophy, theory and
so forth-which you might as well forget about once and for
all, because you are charged with espionage and, according to all
the material of the investigation, you are obviously a spy of an intelligence service. Therefore stop pettifogging. If this is the way
you want to defend yourself I shall cut the interrogation short.
BUKHARIN: r am answering your questions.
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk with Khodjayev about overthrowing the Soviet government, which your conspiratorial group was
preparing for?
BUKHARIN: I spoke in vague nebulous formulas.
VYSHINSKY: But such formulas as he could understand?
BUKHARIN: Perfectly right.
VYSHINSKY (to Khodjayev): Did you understand?
KHODJAYEV: Absolutely.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, it is not a question of words but of
the contents. Did you say that it was necessary to orientate
yourselves in your foreign relations towards various foreign states,
and to make use of the internal contradictions and international
423

contradictions in the interests of the struggle of your group of
conspirators against the Soviet government?
BUKHARIN: Right.
VYSHINSKY: Did you say it?
BUKHARIN: f did.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, Khodjayev is right when he says that
you spoke to him about connections with British spies.
BUKHARIN: But there was nothing of this.
VYSHINSKY (to Khodjayev): Was it so, Khodjayev?
KHODJAYEV: It was.
BUKHARIN: But this is nonsense, because assistance is not
determined by spies. . . .
KHODJAYEV: r do not say spies, but resident agents.
VYSHINSKY: As you see, not just spies but resident agents.
KHODJAYEV: We established with him that it was best to
act either through some Tadjik people or to send a person to
Afghanistan.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): Do you deny this?
mUKHARIN: I do. Nobody asked me about this.
VYSHINSKY: Well, I am asking you.
BUKHARIN: During the year f spent in prison I was not
once asked about it.
VYSHINSKY: We are asking you here in an open proletarian
Court, we are asking you here in this Court before the whole
world.
1BUKHARIN: But you did not ask me about this before.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you again, on the basis of the
testimony which was here given against you: do you choose to
admit before the Soviet Court l:>y what intelligence service you
were enlisted-the British, German or Japanese?
BUKHARIN: None.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions to put to Bukharin.
THE PRES IDEN~: Adjournment for 30 minutes.

*

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Bukharin, proceed with your evidence; only speak
more to the point.
BUKHARIN: All right, I shall.
I said last that an organization of a criminal counterrevolutionary conspiracy -was created, which included the
forces of Yenukidze, of Yagoda, the organization in the Kremlin, in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, the mil-

424

itary organization and forces of the Moscow garrison under the
leadership of the conspirators of the military group, which, as is
self-understood, did not exclude the utilization of other forces
and cadres which were made up of the Trotskyites and Zinovievites.
The more so that in the military group itself, which was the immediate organizer of the forces on which devolved the actual organization of the military coup, there had existed for a comparatively long period a bloc between the Rights, Trotskyites and Zinovievites, who, if my memory does not fail me, had joined this
military group before the contact centre was organized.
During the period preceding the Seventeenth Party Congress, Tomsky broached the idea that the coup d'etat with
the help of the armed counter-revolutionary forces should be
timed exactly for the opening of the Seventeenth Party Congress. According to Tomsky's idea, an integral part of this coup
was to be a monstrous crime-the arrest of the Seventeenth Party
Congress.
This idea of Tomsky's was subjected to a discussion, though
a very cursory one; but objections to this idea were raised on
all hands. I am afraid of making an error, but it seems to me
that it happened this way: that first this was discussed in the
Right centre, but, since it was turned down there, the question
was discussed in the so-called contact centre.
Pyatakov objected to this idea not for considerations of
principle, but for considerations of tactics, because that would
have aroused extreme indignation among the masses. In a word,
objections were voiced not for considerations of principle, but
for purely tactical considerations. This idea was rejected. But the
fact alone that this idea was conceived and that it was subjected to
a discussion speaks sufficiently clearly of the whole monstrosity
and criminality of an organization of this sort.
I must say that at a much earlier period I personally had already
given instructions to Semyonov to organize terrorist groups and
reported this to our Right centre. It was accepted. Thus, I, more
than any other member of the centre, am responsible for the organization of Semyonov's terrorist groups.
I must also stop to continue a thought which I have already
touched on in part, or the facts which I have mentioned-our
allying with various counter-revolutionary forces, especially and
particularly with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks.
As regards my direct practical activities at that time, and not
only my theoretical formulations, I must testify that I tried
to establish a connection of this kind through a number of intermediaries and also personally. I also charged the Socialist-Revolutionary Semyonov-who was mentioned during the interrogation the
day before yesterday-to get in touch with the underground mem425

hers of the Socialist-Revolutionary Central Committee, who, if
I am not mistaken, were then in exile (which does not alter the
case), and consequently I am directly responsible for it not only
as a member of the Right centre, but directly responsible in
the immediate sense of the word .
. Secondly, I tried to .establish contact with organizations and
groups of Socialist-Revolutionaries abroad through a certain Chlenov. This was one of the men in our diplomatic service, whom
I had known years ago, since our school days, when he was a
member of a Social-Democratic organization of that time. I say
this not by way of a digression into history, but to explain and show
why I felt such confidence in him despite the conspiratoria 1
nature of the work of that time. And he tried to establish connections with the Central Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionaries; when he returned, he ha.ct no time to discuss the matter with
me in detail, but from this conversation I ascertained approximately the following. The Socialist-Revolutionaries agreed in principle to support the bloc and maintain contact with the Rights,
Trotskyites, Zinovievites, and the like. But they demanded formal guarantees, almost in written form, their conditions being
that the peasant policy should be changed in the spirit of a kulak
orientation, that the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik Parties
should be legalized-which obviously implied that the government
which would be set up if the conspiracy were successful would
be a coalition government.
Furthermore, during my last trip abroad in 1936, after the
conversation with Rykov, I established contact with the Menshevik Nikolayevsky, who is very close to the leading circles of
the Menshevik Party. From the conversation with Nikolayevsky
I ascertained that he knew about the agreements between the
Rights, Zinoviev's and Kamenev's people, and the Trotskyites,
and that in general he was in the know of all that was going on,
including the Ryutin platform. The concrete and new element of
our conversation was that in the event of the exposure of the
centre of the Rights, or the contact centre, or the upper organization of the conspiracy generally, there would be, through
Nikolayevsky, an understanding with the leaders of the Second
Internatio11al that they would launch a suitable campaign in the
press.
Besides myself, some other prominent leaders of the organization of Rights and Trotskyites (in this case I can speak
about the Rights, I have no information about the others) also
had contact, were establishing criminal connections with representatives of counter-revolutionary organizations which had been
set up long ago. Rykov had connections with the Mensheviks
through Nikolayevsky. I forgot to say .that my meeting with

426

Nikolayevsky was facilitated for me, and not only facilitated,
but camouflaged, by the fact that I had to meet with this Nikolayevsky by virtue of my official business. Thus I had a quite
legitimate cover behind which I could carry on counter-revolutionary conversations and make agreements of one kind or another.
Smirnov, or Foma, as he was called, had important connections
of long standing. These connect~ons had been made when he was
still in the .People's Commissariat of• Agriculture, where, as
you know, there were a number of prominent figures of the Socialist-Revolutionary and kindred movements. Everybody knqws
that some of them have been tried for wrecking. And Smirnov
on his part was likewise arranging connections with the SocialistRevolutionaries.
Thus, there is not a shadow of doubt-and I admit it fully
and entirely-that apart from the bloc with the Trotskyites,
Zinovievites, Kamenevites and bourgeois-nationalist organizations,
there was also absolutely direct and real contact with SocialistRevolutionaries and Mensheviks, for which I myself was to a
large extent directly to blame of course, as a leader of the
centre of the Rights. This meant in the first place the underground
Socialist-Revolutionaries who had remained here, that is to say,
the former Central Committee of the official Party of SocialistRevolutionaries, and, in the second place, the organizatio'll
abroad, which was principally rallied around· such a person
as Mark Vishnyak, the former secretary of the Constituent Assembly.
After the great debacle of the Trotskyites and Zinovievites
in connection with the assassination of Sergei Mironovich Kirov,
after this ...
VYSHINSKY: You want to go on to another period already,
but I would like to ask some questions in connection with the
Socialist-Revolutionaries. Bessonov· testified here concerning his
journey to Prague and his meeting with Sergei Maslov. In Bessonov's conversation with Maslov reference was made to Bukharin
and Rykov. Bessonov said so here. You remember?
BUKHARIN: I thought he said he had been informed about
the underground activities of Bukharin and Rykov.
VYSHINSKY: That is what I want to ask Bessonov before
you continue. Accused Bessonov, did Maslov tell you that he knew
about Bukharin's underground activity?
BESSONOV: He said that he was aware of the counterrevolutionary views of the Right opposition and their underground
activities.
VYSHINSKY: Accused -Bukharin, did you have direct connections with Maslov?
BUKHARIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: You knew what Maslov was doing in Prague,
427

that he was the organizer of a counter-revolutionary kulak party,
that he was living on an income derived from a foreign
intelligence service and from his newspapers and journals? Is that
so, accused Bessonov?
BESSONOV: Quite true.
VYSHINSKY: Through whom did he obtain his information?
BUKHARIN: I do not know, but I think it was through the
surviving members of the Socialist-Revolutionary Central Committee abroad.
·VYSHINSKY: You were connected with the Central Committee
of the Socialist-Revolutionaries?
BUKHARIN: Through Chlenov I was connected with Rapoport.
VYSHINSKY: A Socialist-Revolutionary?
BUKHARIN: This Rapoport was connected withMarkVishnyak.
VYSHINSKY: And they were connected?
BUKHARIN: I do not know, but I can guess. You know that
old acquaintances usually keep in touch in emigration.
VYSHINSKY: So you suppose that Sergei Maslov was informed
about your underground activities through members of the
Central Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionary organization
abroad or ...
BUKHARIN: Or through Rapoport or Vishnyak.
VYSHINSKY: And in regard to Rykov through Nikolayevsky?
BUKHARIN: No, I do not think so.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rykov, have you any conjectures as to
where Sergei Maslov could have obtained his information?
RYKOV: I have no information and no conjectures on this
point.
VYSHINSKY: Did you inform your Menshevik connections
about your underground activity?
RYKOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: Then how was it?
RYKOV: They knew that I was conducting work against the
Central Committee.
VYSHINSKY: How did they know?
RYKOV: They knew it from me.
VYSHINSKY: But you said ...
RYKOV: I understood you to mean that a certain organization
was conducting work, but what kind of work ...
VYSHINSKY: Underground, anti-Soviet. Did they know?
RYKOV: They knew it to this extent, but they did not know
more concrete things.
VYSHINSKY: And there was no need for them to know more
concrete things. So we may suppose that the emigre circle with

428

which Nikolayevsky was associated was informed about youf
underground activities by him? ·
RYKOV: I can say nothing about this.
VYSHINSKY: This is not experts' evidence but an elucidation
of your connections.
RYKOV: I have spoken about my connections. You are asking
if this contact passed to Maslov?
VYSHINSKY: Of course.
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You informed Nikolayevsky about your undenzround work?
'RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, from Bessonov's testimony
it can be taken that Maslov maintained contact with the Rights
and was posted on their counter-revolutionary activities. You,
as the leader of this counter-revolutionary organization, were
cor.sequently also in the sphere of this contact. Do you confirm
this?
BUKHARIN: I was not in the sphere of this c·ontact. I was in
the sphere of contact with the Socialist-Revolutionaries. I have no
information as to what they were doing, but in reply to your question I make a conjecture as to the possible channel.
VYSHINSKY: Through what channels this could pass?
BUKHARIN: Yes, the channels through which this could
pass.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, proceed.
BUKHARIN: So, I left off at the question of the composition
of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," which, as it appears from
the entire material, is called the centre of Rights and Trotskyites
but actually has a much broader content not only from the point
of view of its hangers-on or its environment, but from the point of
view of its very composition.
VYSHINSKY: In speaking about these connections of your
centre and your bloc, you have said nothing about connections
with the foreign intelligence service and fascist circles.
BUKHARIN: I have nothing to testify on this subject.
VYSHINSKY. Apart from what you have testified already?
BUKH:ARIN: Yes. Apart from what I have testified.
VYSHINSKY: Proceed.
BUKHARIN: When the fascists came to power in Germany,
exchanges of opinion commenced amongthe leaders of the counterrevolutionary organizations concerning the possibility of utilizing
foreign states in connection with a war situation. Here I must say
frankly, and I tell the Court what I precisely remember, that in
this major question, which is a very important subject for the Court's
consideration and for the determination of the legal sanction,

429

the 'frotskyltes were outright f.or territorial concessions, while
on the whole the leading circles of the . Right counter-revolutionary organization were primarily <:oncerned with concessions,
trade agreements, duties, prices, supplies of raw material, fuel,
etc.-in short, various concessions of an economic nature. When
I began mytestimony I told the Court that I, as one of the leaders
of the counter-revolutionary bloc, am not just as a cog in the
wheel, bear responsibility for absolutely everything done by this
organization. But in so far as concrete things are concerned, I think
that it can be said of this case that the guiding principle in the
bloc, the most active political principle in the sense of the acuteness of the struggle, in the sense of tar-reaching criminal connections, etc., was after all the Trotskyite section. I repeat, I say
this not in order to disclaim the responsibility of the Right section,
since in this case from the point of view of criminology it is not
important who first said "a," who repeated this "a," who exposed and reported it; but from the point of view of the internal
mechanics of this case and from the point of view of elucidating
the personal rofe of Trotsky, who, unfortunately, is beyond the
reach of the Court, I think this question has a certain importance,
and that is why I make bold to ~mphasize it here.
In the summer of 1934 Radek told me that directions had been
received from Trotsky, that Trotsky was conducting negotiations
with the Germans, that Trotsky had already promised the Germans a
number of territorial concessions, including the Ukraine. If my
memory does not fail me, territorial concessions to japan were also
mentioned. In general, in these negotiations Trotsky already behaved
not only as a conspirator who hopes to get power by means ot an armed
coup at some future date, but already felt himself the master of
Soviet land, which he wants to convert from Soviet to non-Soviet.
I must say that then, at that time, I remonstrated with Radek.
Radek confirms this in his testimony, just as he confirmed at a
confrontation with me that I objected to this, that I considered it
essential that he, Radek, should write and tell Trotsky that he was
going too far in these negotiations, that he might compromise not
only himself, but all his allies, us Right conspirators in particular,
and that this meant certain disaster for us. It seemed to me that
with the growth of mass patriotism, which is beyond·all doubt,
this point of view of Trotsky's was politically and tactically
inexpedient from the standpoint of the plan of the conspiracy
itself, and that much greater caution was needed.
VYSHINSKY: Who said that?
BUKHARIN: I said it. I even considered that preliminary negotiations were not needed.
VYSHINSKY: To avoid exposure?
BUKHARIN: No, there were also other considerations ....

430·

VYSH1NSKY: As you have just said, you po1nted out thert
that this might lead too far .... You were afraid of exposure?
BUKHARIN: I do not speak of exposure in the sense of arrest,
but in the sense that the whole business might have come to grief.
VYSHINSKY: I am also speaking of this. You expressed this
point of view out of caution, to save your plot from ruin?
BUKHARIN: This will have to be turned round a bit ... .
VYSHINSKY: You can turn it round as much as you like ... .
What year was this?
BUKHARIN: The conversation with Radek took place in the
summer of 1934.
VYSHINSKY: And the conversation with Karakhan was later?
BUKHARIN: It took place after his arrival in Moscow in 1935.
VYSHINSKY: And was this conversation with Karakhan preceaed by a conversation with Yenukidze, or was the conversation
with Yenukidze on this topic later?
BUKHARIN: The first conversation was with Tomsky.
VYSHINSKY: So, the conversation with Tomsky was the basis?
BUKHARIN: There were three conversations on this subject.
VYSHINSKY: We will proceed to that later. Continue.
BUKHARIN: Must I dwell on the internal aspect of the affair,
or the conversations that took place, or is this of no interest?
VYSHINSKY: That depends on what the conversations were
about.
BUKHARIN: Of course they were not about the weather.
VYSHINSKY: Tell the Court about your crimes.
BUKHARIN: Tomsky considered it permissible to take advantage of war and preliminary agreements with Germany. This I opposed by the following arguments. I said that in the first place
if Germany were to intervene in one way or another during the war
to help the counter-revolutionary coup, then, as it always happens,
Germany, being rather a strong military and technical factor,
would inevitably put her feet on the table and tear up any preliminary agreement which had been concluded. Secondly, I ac..vanced the argument that since this was to be a military coup, then
by virtue of the very logic of things the military group of the conspirators would have extraordinary influence, and, as always happens in these cases, it would be just that section of the joint upper
group of the counter-revolutionary circles that would command great
material forces, and consequently political forces, and that hence a
peculiar Bonapartist danger might arise. And Bonapartists-I was
thinking particularly of Tukhachevsky-would start out by making short shrift of their allies and so-called inspirers in Napoleon
style. In myconversations I always called Tukhachevsky a "poten431

Hai little Napoleon, i, and you know how Napoleon dealt with
the so-called ideologists.
VYSHINSKY: And you considered yourself an ideologist?
BUKHARIN: Both an ideologist of a counter-revolutionary
coup and a practical man. You, of course, would prefer to hear
that I consider myself a spy, but I never considered myself a spy,
nor do I now.
VYSHINSKY: It would be more correct if you did.
BUKHARIN: That is your opinion, but my opinion is different.
VYSHINSKY: We shall see what the opinion of the Court is.
Tell us how you conducted this "ideological" conversation with
Tomsky then or at any other time; did Tomsky propose two variants
for the seizure of power?
BUKHARIN: I am coming to that in the next few words.
VYSHINSKY: I'll wait.
BUKHARIN: Very well. I wanted to say that after these preliminary conversations in 1935-1 do not know what other factors
played a part before the adoption of any decision on the part of
the Right centre and on the part of the contact centre: whether
Tomsky was being pressed by Yenukidze or the military circles,
or jointly by Yenukidze, the Trotskyites and the Zinovievitesbut the fact is that Karakhan left without a preliminary conversation with the members of the leading centre, with the exception
of Tomsky.
Now I want to tell the Court what I remember concerning the
three conversations that took place after Karakhan's arrival. The
first conversation was with Tomsky, the second with Yenukidz~ and
the third with Karakhan, who introduced certain details and an
added coefficient into the conversation.
As I remember, Tomsky told me that Karakhan had arrived at
an agreement with Germany on more advantageous terms than
Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: First of all, tell us about Tomsky. [am interested in your talk with Tomsky concerning your plan of a coup d'etat,
as you call it, the seizure of power. When did you have a conversation about opening the front to the Germans?
BUKHARIN: I am coming to that now.
VYSHINSKY: Can you touch on the question of how you
and Tomsky were going to open the front to the Germans in c<1se
of war?
BUKHARIN: I will speak about this a bit later.
VYSHINSKY: You do not care to speak on the subject that
interests the investigation now?
BUKHARIN: I shall speak about this front.
VYSHINSKY: I put the question for the third time. When did
you have a conversation about opening the front to the Germans?
432

BUKHARIN: When I asked Tomskyhow he conceived the mechanics of the coup he said this was the business of the military
organization, which was to open the front.
VYSHINSKY: So Tomsky was preparing to open the front?
BUKHARIN: He did not say that.
VYSHINSKY: Yes or no?
BUKHARIN: I asked how he visualized the mechanism of
this intervention.
VYSHINSKY: Whose intervention?
BUKHARIN: Of certain foreign states.
VYSHINSKY: Did he say how it was conceived?
BUKHARIN: Tomsky did say.
VYSHINSKY: Tomsky said, "Open the fron.t "?
BUKHARIN: I will put it exactly.
VYSHINSKY: What did he say?
BUKHARIN: TomRky said that this was a matter for the military organization, which was to open the front.
VYSHINSKY: Why was it to open the front7
;
BUKHARIN: He did not say.
VYSHINSKY: Why was it to open the front?
BUKHARIN: From my point of view, it 01.1ght not to open
the front.
VYSHINSKY: From the point of° view of your organization?
BUKHARIN: From the point of view of our organization.
VYSHINSKY: Were they to open the front from the point of
view of Tornsky, or not?
BUKHARIN: From.the point of view of Tomsky? At any rate,
he did not object to this point of view.
VYSHINSKY: He agreed?
.
BUKHARIN: Since he did not object, it means that most
likely he three-quarters agreed.
VYSHINSKY: He nevertheless kept one-quarter in reserve?
BUKHARIN: I only wanted to stress the pofa1t.
VYSHINSKY: I. am asking you. Answer the question.
BUKHARIN: Citizen Procurator, you said :that every .word
was very important to the Court.
.
VYSHINSKY: Permit. me .to read Bukharin's testimony,
Vol. V, pp. 95-96: "Tomsky told me. that two varian:ts were discussed:
the case where the new government would be formed ip time of peace,"
and this meant that the conspirators would : organize a new
government in tir.ne of peace, and "the case where it would be
organized in time of war; in the latter case th:e Germans were
demanding big economic concessions," concessions of which
I have already spoken, "and were insisting upon cessions of
territory." Tell us, is this true or not?
BUKHARIN: Yes, that is all true.
28

433

VYSHINSKY (continues to read): "I asked Tomsky how themechanism of the coup was visualized in this connection. Hesaid that this was the business of the military organization, which
was to open the front to the Germans.''
BUKHARIN: Yes, correct.
VYSHINSKY: Did Tomsky agree with this, or not?
BUKHARIN: He said "was to" ("dolzhna"); but the meaning
of these words is "milssen" and not "sollen."
VYSHINSKY: Leave your philology aside. In Russian "was.
to" means "was to."
BUKHARIN: It means that the military circles had the idea
that in that case these military circles . . •
·
VYSHlNSKY: No, not the idea, but they were to. That
means ...
BUKHARIN: No, it does not mean.
VYSHfNSKY: So they were not to open the front?
BUKHARIN: From whose point of view? Tomsky told me what
the military said, what Yenukidze said.
VYSHINSKY: And what did you testify?
BUKHARIN: I know very well what I testified.
VYSHINSKY: "Tomsky said that the coup was the business.
of the qiilitary organization, which was to open the front to theGermaris." Is the question clear?
-BUKHARIN: I said that I asked Tomsky: "How is the mechanism of this intervention visualized?" He answered: "This is
the business o:f the miJitary organization, which is to open the
front to the Germans~'' Whereupon I said ...
VYSHINSKY: No more for the present. They were to open the
front. That is, they intended to open the fronf to the Germans?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
:
VYSHTNSKY: In which circles?
BUKHARIN: In the circles of the military·organization.
VYSHINSKY: Did Tomsky agree to this?
BUKHARIN: He did not say so directly. :
VYSHINSKY: He three-quarters agreed?
BUKHARIN: I am telling you that from what he said it followed that he probably agreed to this.
:
, . VYSH INSKY: An.ct when he told you this, did· you object?
·BUKHARIN: I did.
VYSHINSKY: And why did you not write "I objected"?
BUKHARIN: That is written here later on.
VYSHINSKY: What is written later on is something entirely
different.
BUKHARIN: That means that f objected.
VYSHINSKY: What is written later is: "Whereupon I said
that in that case ... '' In which case?
·
434

BUKHARIN: In case the front were opened.
VYSHINSKY: Right. "In that case it would be expedient
to try those guilty of the defeat at the front. This will enable us
to win over the masses by playing on patriotic slogans."
BUKHARIN: But permit me, I will explain that to you, if
you will allow me.
VYSHINSKY: One moment. Let us examine it in order, in
order. Was this your objection?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Is that what you told him: "The front must
not be opened''?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: But where is this written?
BUKHARIN: It is not written, but it is self-understood.
VYSHINSKY: And what does playing on patriotic slogans
mean?
.
BUKHARIN: The word "play" here was not meant in an·
odious sense ....
VYSHINSKY: "Was to" is not meant in its right sense,
and "play" is not meant in its right sense.
BUKHARIN: "Was to" in Russian has two meanings.
VYSHINSKY: And we want to have one meaning here.
BUKHARIN: That is what you would like, but I am entitled
not to agree with you. It is well known that in German "sollen"
and "miissen" have two i;neanings ...
VYSHINSKY: You are accustomed to speak in German, but
we are speaking in the Soviet language.
BUKHARIN: The German language in itself is not odious.
VYSHINSKY: You are continuing to speak in German, you are
already accustomed to negotiate with the Germans in their language. But here we speak in Russian. When Tomsky told you that
it was necessary to open the front to the Germans, then, if you
objected, you should have said as follows: "I objected, r said
that I would not consent to such a betrayal, to such treason."
Did you say that?
BUKHARIN: No, I did not. But if I said that it was necessary ...
VYSHINSKY: To 'play on patriotic slogans, t.hat is, to speculate on them, to pretend that somebody committed treason, but
that you were patriots ....
BUKHARIN: That is not quite so, because in other parts
of my testimony, including the confrontation with Radek, and
during all the conversations with Radek, I objected to what
Radek said and declared that Tomsky did no± understand ....
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, that you have here employed
a jesuitical method, a perfidious method, is borne out by the fol28*

435

1owing. Permit me to read further: "I had in mind that by this,
that is, by the conviction _of those guilty of the defeat, we would
be able at the same time to rid ourselves of the Bonapartist danger
that alarmed me.''
BUKHARIN: Yes, quite true.
VYSHfNSKY: So that is how you "objected" to the opening
of the front.
BUKHARIN: One task by no means interferes with the other.
VYSHINSKY: One task is the opening of the front ....
BUKHARIN: No, not the opening of the front.
VYSHINSKY: To try those guilty of defeat at the front, to
play on patriotic slogans, and thus get off scot free.
BUKHARIN: An entirely different orientation.
VYSHINSKY: That is the conversation you had with Tomsky.
ls it correctly recorded here?
BUKHARIN: Correctly, of course, but you did not read everything.
VYSHINSKY: I have read three paragraphs; are they correctly
recorded?
BUKHARIN: The three paragraphs are quite correctly recorded.
VYSHINSKY: Did you speak to Yenukidze on this subject?
BUKHARIN: I did speak to Yenukidze.
VYSHINSKY: Did you speak to Karakhan?
BUKHARIN: I did.
VYSHINSKY: What did Yenukidze and Karakhan say on this
subject?
BUKHARIN: Yenukidze ...
VYSHINSKY: In general confirmed this?
BUKHARIN: In general he confirmt:d it. Tomsky 1earnt
this from Karakhan and Yenukidze.
VYSHINSKY: That is? ;
'BUKHARIN: They confirmed, firstly, that Karakhan had concluded an agreement with the Germans on conditions of economic
concessions of territories, to which Karakhan did not reply, saying
that this matter must be discussed. It included a formula regarding
the severance of the Union Republics. Thirdly, about pacts.
VYSHINSKY: Thirdly, about opening the front?
BUKHARIN: Thirdly, about the pacts of mutual assistance
of the U.S.S.R. with Czechoslovakia and France.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have a pact with them?
BUKHARIN: I am conveying what Tomsky said about what
l:e was told by Karakhan. That is what he said. The Germans .demanded the annulment of these pacts.
. VYSHINSKY:· Of whom with whom?
BUKHARIN: Of the new government.
436

VYSHINSKY: You thought that you were already the government?
BUKHARIN: We did not think so, but Karakhan said that in
case ...
VYSHINSKY: Was it sanctioned?
BUKHARIN: We did not afterwards object, which means that
we sanctioned it.
VYSHINSKY: That is, you thought that you were acting as
a government?
BUKHARIN: The meaning of the pact ...
VYSHINSKY: Then you would break the alliance with Czechoslovakia?
BUKHARIN: You did not let me finish. Karakhan replied to
this in the affirmative. We reckoned on deceiving the Germans
and ·on not fulfilling this demand.
VYSH INSKY: And so you built everything on deception. And
they reckoned on deceiving you?
BUKHARIN: That always happens.
VYSHINSKY: On using you and then throwing you on to the
muck heap.
BUKHARIN: That is so.
VYSHTNSKY: In general, both of you lost.
BUKHARIN: Happily. that is so.
VYSHINSKY: Happily for us, that is so. And did you talk
to Karakhan about opening the front?
BUKHARIN: Karakhan said that the Germans were demanding
a military alliance with Germany.
VYSHINSKY: And are the gates closed to an ally?
BUKHARIN: Karakhan gave me an answer to this question.
VYSHINSKY: That the gates are closed to an ally?
BUKHARIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: That means to open the gates?
BUKHARIN: Pardon me, there was no alliance yet.
VYSHINSKY: But there were expectations, plans?
.
BUKHARIN: Well, just now the Soviet Union has an alliance with France, but that does not mean that it opens the Soviet
frontiers.
VYSHINSKY: What did you have?
BUKHARIN: We had nothing; there were verbal plans.
VYSHINSKY: You 9o not want to admit that you were the
initiator of the proposal to open the front in case of an attack by
the Germans.
BUKHARIN: No. But Rykov affirms this because it is now
perfectly clear...•
VYSHINSKY: But Rykov confirms that Bukharin was the
initiator of this idea. Accused Rykov, is that correct?
437

RYKOV: I first heard about opening the front from Bukharin.
BUKHARIN: And that is true. But that does not mean that
I was the initiator. It was after the conversation with Tomsky.
VYSHINSKY (to Rykov): Did Bukharin object to it?
RYKOV: He did not object in my presence.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated. (To Bukharin.) Continue your account. I consider that the question of opening the front is clear.
I have no more questions.
BUKHARIN. l forgot to say and mention that when Trotsky
was negotiating with the Germans, the Rights were already a component part of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and that consequently they were partners to these negotiations, even in spite
of the fact that Trotsky did this on his own initiative, independently of any preliminary arrangement.
That in the main is all I have to say, I think.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, the accused Bukharin has finished his testimony.
VYSHINSKY: I have no questions to put.
THE PRESIDENT. Comrade Procurator, we have now to
settle the question of summoning the witnesses. Or shall we proceed to interrogate Bukharin on the events of l 918?
VYSH INS KY: I have already done so.
.
THE PRESIDENT: We must decide at what time to summon
the witnesses: now, or after the adjournment?
VYSHINSKY: If the witnesses are present .I would request
to have them called in now.
THE PRESIDENT: The first witness to be. called is Yakovleva?
VYSHINSKY: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Call in the witness.
VYSHINSKY: White the witness is being .called in, permit
me to put to Bukharin a question in connection with his testimony
at the preliminary investigation-p. 94, Vol. V.- May I read it?
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
.
VYSHINSKY: "We clearly perceived the gigantic growth of
· Soviet patriotism, which growth was connected with the
tangible growth of the might, strength and prosp~rity of the
broad ma5ses, the extraordinary popularity of Stalin's slogan
that we would not surrender a single inch of Soviet land, which
in our eyes was a perfectly obvious indication of this growing patriotism." Do you confirm this?
BUKHARIN: I do.
VYSHINSKY: "To set ourselves up against this slogan, however cunning our political calculations might be, would most
certainly have meant isolating ourselves from the masses once

438

.and for all, rendering our position meaningless in advance, and
-0ur plans utterly hopeless." Do you confirm this?
BUKHARIN: I confirm it fully.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
THE PRES ID ENT: Be seated.
(Witness Yakovleva enters the Court.)
THE PRESIDENT: Is your name Yakovleva, Varvara Nikolayevna?
YAKOVLEVA: Yes, Yakovleva, Varvara Nikolayevna.
THE PRESIDENT: You are summoned in the case of Bukharin, Nikolai lvanovich. You are called upon to tell the Court the
-truth. As you have been summoned at the request of the Procurator of the U.S.S.R., he has the right to interrogate you.
VYSHINSKY (to Yakovleva): Do you recall your participation in the group of "Left Communists" in 1918?
YAKOVLEVA: Very clearly.
_
,
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, briefly, who was the principal 'organi.zer and leader of this group?
YAKOVLEVA: Its ideological leader was Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: Who was the organizer of the activities of this
_group?
YAKOVLEVA: The factional centre of the anti-Soviet group
<>f "Left Communists" was the Moscow Regional Bureau. It was
~lected at a regional Party conference, had a fairly large number of
·members, including peripheral functionaries. Then it set up what
was called the narrow bureau for its permanent organizational and directing work. At the end of 1917 and the beginning of 1918 this narrow
bureau consisted entirely of "Left Communists," and it represented
iihe factional centre of the group of "Left Communists."
VYSHINSKY: Who was the leader of this centre?
YAKOVLEVA: The ideological leader was. Bukharin. Then
there were a number of public persons who formulated the ideology
Df the "Left Communists." They included.Preobrazhensky, Radek
:and Ossinsky.
VYSHINSKY: I am interested in the particulars about Bukharin, inasmuch as he is charged in this case. We need this for a char.acterization of him.
Tell us, what was Bukharin's attitude to the peace negotiations
-in Brest-Litovsk, to the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace?
YAKOVLEVA: Bukharin, like the whole group of the "Left
·Communists,,, was opposed to the conclusion of peace with the
·Dermans.
VYSHINSKY: What measures did he take to frustrate the
.conclusion of peace?
YAKOVLEVA: There were a number of utterances in the press
.and in Party circles, and then there were the illegal activities

439

of the group of "Left Communists," which were directed towards
the same ends.
VYSHINSKY: ·In what did the underground anti-Soviet activities of the group of "Left Communists" consist? Perhaps you
recall the most outstanding facts characteristic of its activities?
YAKOVLEVA: What I know about the illegal activities of
the anti-Soviet group of so-called "Left Communists" is the
following: I mentioned the narrow bureau, which was the factional centre of the group. I was the secretary of the Regional Bureau,
but when I left for Leningrad-this was at the beginning of December 1917-the secretary of the bureau was Mantsev. At the end
of February 1918, a meeting of the Moscow Regional Bureau was.
held at which the question of concluding peace with the Germans
was discussed. At this meeting, Stukov, a member of the Bureau,
moved a resolution on this question and spoke in favour of this
motion, expressing the idea that in the political struggle against
the conclusion of peace with the Germans, in the political
struggle on the question of war and peace, we must not only
not shrink from replacing the leadership of the Party and the government, but we must not even shrink from the arrest of the leading,
most resolute part of the government, as represented by Lenin,.
Stalin and Sverdlov. And if the struggle were to become more
acute, we must not shrink even from their physical extermination.
VYSHINSKY: From the physical extermination of whom?
YAKOVLEVA: Of the leaders of the Party: Lenin, Stalin and•
Sverdlov.
VYSHINSKY: This was proclaimed at a secret meeting of the
bureau?
YAKOVLEVA: It was not a secret meeting, it was an open
meeting of the narrow bureau of the Moscow Regional Bureau.
VYSHINSKY: And so it might be said that this was a meeting of "Left Communists." There were no others present?
YAKOVLEVA: No.
VYSHINSKY: This was said by Stukov?
YAKOVLEVA: Yes. Stukov also said that in a political struggle we must not only not shrink from replacing the government
and even from arresting its leading and politically irreconcilable
section, but even from the loss of the Soviet power, which in the
event of the conclusion of peace with the Germans would become
a mere formality. Stukov's draft resolution and his speech at
this meeting were recorded in the minutes book of the Moscow
Regional Bureau.
In May 1918, in connection with the Moscow Regional Con·
ference, Mantsev and I were preparing to hand over the materials of the Regional Bureau, and Mantsev told me that Bukharin
insisted on the removal of this draft resolution and the recorci
440

of Stukov's speech from the minutes book of the Regional Bureau~
for the reason that it was necessary to avoid politically compromising the position of the Moscow Regional Bureau and the
exposure of its illegal activities. Guided by this argument, Mantsev and I removed (tore out or cut out) from the minutes book and
destroyed the pages that contained the record of Stukov's speech
and his draft resolution.
It should be mentioned that this was that very meeting of the
Moscow Regional Bureau about which Lenin wrote in his article
"Strange and Monstrous." In this article Lenin referred to the
explanatory text accompanying the resolution.
The page from the minutes book of the Regional Bureau we
destroyed was this explanatory text accompanying the resolution.
I must also say something about the origin of this document.
I was not presen_t at the meeting of the Regional Bureau in
question. I was at that time in Leningrad. I returned to Mos-cow very soon after this meeting, two or three days later. Having
acquainted myself with the minutes of the Regional Bureau, I
spoke to Stukov and told him that the resolution he had moved
was politically unjustified and also criticized his speech rather
sharply. Stukov told me that he did not bear responsibility
for the political justification of this motion, and that on this subject I must address myself to Bukharin, for he had received
this draft resolution from Bukharin in Leningrad just before
the meeting of the Regional Bureau, together with a letter in
which Bukharin instructed him, Stukov, as to the character
of his speech in support of the motion.
Shortly after this, I had a talk with Bukharin on the subject.
This was before the Seventh Party Congress. I asked Bukharin whether what Stukov had said was true. Bukharin confirmed that the
draft resolution was sent to Stukov by him, Bukharin, and that
he had instructed Stukov how to speak in support of the motion~
He had advised him to elucidate to the members of the Regional
Bureau the possible prospects of the political struggle on the question of war and peace, and he thereupon said roughly the same as what
was contained in Stukov' s speech and what I have just related. I told
Bukharin that I had until then believed that Stukov's idea about
the arrest and deposal of the government was Stukov's personal
standpoint. Bukharin rejoined that among the "Left Communists" there were people who were able with logical consistency and
thoroughness to envisage all the possible prospects of the struggle.
He considered Stukov one of these people. He considered that
Stukov would not fear to put the question bluntly and sharply, and
that is why he had instructed Stukov to draft the resolution and
fo expound to the members of the Regional Bureau the ideas l
have mentioned.

441

At the same time Bukharin told me that he was not the only one
who thought in this way, that he, Bukharin, had had a frank talk on
the subject with Trotsky, and that Trotsky also thought that the
13olitical struggle on the question of war and peace had only just
begun, that the "Left Communists" must envisage the possibility
-0f this struggle going beyond the confines of the Party, and that
.allies must be sought who could be relied upon in this struggle.
Trotsky had told Bukharin that the "Left" Socialist-Revolution.aries, whose position on the question of the war was already fairly
·clear, might prove to be such allies.
Bukharin also said that Trotsky too believed that the struggle
might assume most aggressive forms, involving not only the replacement of the government, but also the overthrow of the government and the physical extermination of leading people in the
-government and the Party. He thereupon mentioned Lenin, Stalin
.and Sverdlov.
·
·At the same time Bukharin informed me that in the course
·of this conversation Trotsky had frankly told him that his, Trotsky's, halfway position on the question of the conclusion of peace
was nothing but a tactical manoeuvre, that he simply did not
dare to come out actively in favour of the position of the "Left
Communists," that is, against the conclusion of peace, that he
was a new man in the Party and if he openly adopted the position
-0f the "Left Communists" it would be said that Trotsky had
joined the Party in order to fight Lenin.
During this conversati.on, when telling me of Trotsky's line
and of the possible allies of the "Left Communists," Bukharin
.also referred to Zinoviev and Kamenev. He said that Zinoviev and
Kamenev occupied an extremely vacillating position on the question of war and peace, and that during the fight over this question
they had in private conversations repeatedly expressed themselves to Bukharin directly in favour of the position of the "Left
Communists." Bukharin said that Zinoviev and Kamenev dared
not come out openly against Lenin, that they had been compromised by their position during the October days on the question
·of the October uprising,. of the Socialist revolution, and
that therefore they did not dare to come out against Lenin openly.
He said that Zinoviev and Kamenev, like Bukharin and Trotsky,
.also thought that the political struggle on the question of war and
peace might go beyond the confines of the Party, and that in that
-case the "Left Communists" must think of allies on whom they
.could rely. But, Bukharin said, on the question of allies Zinoviev
.and Kamenev went farther than Trotsky and considered that the
Menslleviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries might also become
:Such allies. Bukharin said that Zinoviev and Kamenev, even though
442

they had come out in favour of the conclusion of peace,
were opposed to Lenin, did not believe in the victory of
the revolution, and did not believe that the Bolsheviks could
retain power. They considered the victory of counter-revolution
inevitable and that this counter-revolution would be an unpreced-entedly bloody one.
I soon had occasion to hear from Zinoviev himself his opinion on this question. This was somewhat later, during the Seventh
Party Congress. One day Bukharin took me to see Zinoviev in the
Hotel Astoria. When we arrived, Zinoviev at once began to talk
.about counter-revolution. He said that it was mustering its forces, that it would go badly with us, and that the bloodshed would
be extraordinary. Bukharin turned the conversation to the ques.;tion of the conclusion of peace. Zinoviev took up the subject and
said roughly as follows: "Well, the conclusion of peace will help
to accomplish the historically inevitableand inexorably approaching counter-revolution by more peaceful means and with less
bloodshed. After. the conclusion of .peace the Soviet power will
be obliged, under the joint pressure of the Germans and the internal counter-revolution, to make concessions and, in particular,
to include other parties in the government." He said that in general
the conclusion of peace with the Germans would be one more proof
that Zinoviev and Kamenev were right, of the correctness of
th~ir view that the time was not ripe for a Socialist revolution.
"After the conclusion of peace, the Germans, supported by the forces
of internal counter-revolution, will switch the revolution over to
bourgeois-democratic lines and liquidate the October Revolution."
And when I, in great astonishment, asked Zinoviev whether this
was the reason why he favoured the conclusion of peace with the
Germans, he was greatly embarrassed and said: "Of course not. I
only consider that if the forces of the revolution prove inadequate
and the counter-revolution inevitable, the Germans, and· the conclusion of peace with the Germans, may play a positive part:"
Thus the.position of Zinoviev on the question of peace really proved
to have had nothing in common with the position of Lenin. Zinovlev's position was thoroughly capitulationist; and as a matter of
fact I then got the impression that he dreamed of peace as one of
the means of liquidating the Socialist revolution. Somewhat la-

ter...
VYSHINSKY: What was Bukharin's attitude to this question?
YAKOVLEVA: Bukharin was present.
VYSHINSKY: Did he express himself?
YAKOVLEVA: When we left, Bukharin said to me: "Zinoviev was embarrassed, you put him such awkward, tactless questions. Nevertheless, he has said enough to make his position clear."
-I answered that Zinoviev had said more than enough, but I could
443

not understand why Bukharin referred to Zinoviev and Kamenev
as allies of the "Left Communists,,, as people whom he hoped
to win over to his side; in my opinion, we did not need capitulators.
To this Bukharin rejoined that I, Yakovleva, was unable to take
a long view.
VYSHINSKY: A long view?
YAKOVLEVA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What does that mean?
YAKOVLEVA: At that time I did not attach any significance
to it, but later on I thought over what it meant, namely, that if
you go beyond the confines of the Party, then even Trotsky, evea
Zinoviev and Kamenev, would be of use, and that this was exactly
the reason for the talk about the allies which the "Left Communists" were to have in mind shou.ld they suffer defeat within the
Party.
VYSHINSKY: Irrespective of what these allies represented?
YAKOVLEVA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Continue.
YAKOVLEVA: What I have still to say about the illegal activities of the group of "Left Communists" relates to a somewhat
later period, roughly to the end of April or to May. At that time
it was already perfectly clear that the "Left Communists" had
suffered severe defeat in the Party. This was shown by the Seventh
Party Congress, it was shown by the position of the majority. of
the organizations in the localities after the Seventh Party Congress,
and, finally, it was shown by the very attitude of the population
and the Party circles towards the conclusion of peace, which took
place at that time. Roughly at the end of April, perhaps it may
have been at the beginning of May-I cannot say exactly-there
was an illegal meeting, a private illegal conference of the group
of "Left Communists. "
As far as I can recall there were present: Pyatakov, Preobrazhensky, Bukharin, Stukov, Lobov, Maximovsky, Mantsev, Kizelshtein and I. At this meeting Bukharin made a report. He said
that the "Left Communists'' had suffered defeat in the Party>
but that this did not remove the question of the "ruinous" consequences of the Brest-Litovsk Peace, that the "Left Communists»
must not lay down their arms, and that allies must be sought
outside the Party. Such allies were the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries; their position on the question of war and peace at
that time had become perfectly definite. In connection with the
conclusion of peace they had resigned from the government. Their
Second Congress had taken place, and it had endorsed the resignation of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries from the government
and their opposition to the conclusion of peace. Bukharin informed
this conference that already in February the "Left" Socialist-

444

Revolutionaries had started negotiations with the "Left Communists" for the joint formation of a government, and that he therefore
.considered it expedient once more to start negotiations with the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries for the formation of a joint
government. It should be mentioned that in the course of his report
Bukharin again enlarged on the same ideas about the prospects of
-the struggle over the question of peace which had been expounded
before by Stukov and of which he had spoken about to me in the
.conversation which I have just related. He spoke about the possibility of extremely aggressive forms of struggle, that the question
of the government itself and of the formation of a government from
"Left Communists" and "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries was al:ready perfectly clear, that in the course of the struggle for this the
question might arise of the arrest of the leading group of the government as represented by Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, and that if the
·struggle became more acute even the physical extermination of the
most resolute group of the leaders of the Soviet government was prob.able. Some time later, very soon after this, another conference was
called, consisting roughly of the same people. The conference adopt-ed Bukharin's proposal to start negotiations with the "Left n
'Socialist-Revolutionaries about the joint formation of the gov-€rnment, and to ascertain their views. It was also agreed that
these negotiations should be conducted by Bukharin and Pyatakov. Somewhat later, very soon afterwards, a conference was again
~ummoned consisting roughly of the same people. At this second
.conference Bukharin reported that the negotiations had taken
place, that they had negotiated with Kamkov, Karelin and
Proshyan, that the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries agreed to
-the joint formation of the government with the "Left Communists," had hinted that they already had a concrete plan for the
seizure of power and the arrest of the government and that they
made it a definite condition that the "Left Communists 77 should
iake part in the organizational preparations for the seizure of power
.and the replacement of the government.
Bukharin proposed that consent should be· given in prin-ciple to the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries about taking such
.a part in tl~e organizational preparationst and ·that negotiations
with them should be continued on this basis. The conference endorsed
:Bukharin's view and resolved that the negotiations should be contin-Qed on the basis mentioned. A few days after this conference, the
Moscow Regional Conference took place, at which the "Left Communists" were again completely smashed, and the Regional Bureau
dissolved. The "Left Communists" lost their organizational force
.and their organizational base and generally speaking ceased to be
.an organizational force of any kind. Thus the "Left'' Socialist:Revolutionaries received no organizational assistance from the
445

"Left Communists" and did their job with their own forces. I am
referring to the July revolt.
That is all I know about the illegal activities of the "LeH
Communists."
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, judging by your- evidence, yoa
affirm that in 1918, immediately after the October Revolution,.
during the period when the Brest-Litovsk Peace was being concluded,.
there existed an anti-Soviet conspiracy in which Bukharin and,
his group of so-called "Left Communists," Trotsky and his group.
and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries took part?
YAKOVLEVA: There undoubtedly was a conspiracy with the
~'Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries inasmuch as quite definite negotiations were conducted with them.
· VYSHINSKY: What was the role of Bukharin in this affair?
YAKOVLEVA: I have stated that Bukharin himself proposed
that these negotiations should be conducted, and that he conducted:
·
them in conjunction with Pyatakov.
VYSHINSKY: That is, his role WfiS a perfectly practical one,.
as a leader of this conspiracy?
YAKOVLEVA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You confirm this?
YAKOVLEVA: I do. .
VYSHINSKY: Further, you confirm that Bukharin spoke of
the necessity of not shrinking in the course of a struggle from the
arrest of the leaders of the Party and the government?
YAKOVLEVA: He said that in the course of the struggle it
might so happen that we must not shrink from this.
VYSHINSKY: He had in mind?
YAKOVLEVA: He had in mind determination and politicat
irreconcilability, that is, readiness to fight to the end for the overthrow of the leaders of the Party I have mentioned.
VYSHINSKY: You said that it was Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov·
that he had in mind?
YAKOVLEVA: Yes, these names were mentioned by Stukov_
VYSHTNSKY: And did Bukharin mention them?
YAK OVLEVA: I also heard them from Bukharin.
· VYSHINSKY: You heard them?
YAK OVLEVA: f heard the same from Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: You confirm to the Court that Bukharin also·
told you that the assassination of Lenin, as the head of theSoviet state, and Stalin and Sverdlov, as leaders of the Party and
the government, was politically expedient and necessary.
YAKOVLEVA: Bukharin spoke about that. Of course, he spokeof it cursorily, veiling it in a number of vague and unnecessary theoretical arguments, as Bukharin likes to do generally. He wrappedt
446

up this idea like a cocoon in a host of lengthy explanations, but
·he said it.
VYSHJNSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you want to say anything?
BUKHARIN: I can speak on the sum total of what Varvara
Nikolayevna said.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, were you the organizer
and leader of the so-called group of "Left Communists" in 1918?
BUKHARIN: I was one of the organizers.
VYSHINSKY: You were one of the organizers of this group?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
·
VYSHINSKY: Did you at this period conduct illegal work,.
fighting the Soviet power?
BUKHARIN: Here one must deal with various periods. If it is
a question of the period prior to the Brest-Litovsk Peace, there
was nothing illegal in the strict meaning of the term; for the simple
reason that everybody knew about the struggle, there was an open
organ of this struggle, conversations took place openly....
VYSHINSKY: Did you speak openly of the arrest of Lenin,.
Stalin and Sverdlov?
BUKHARIN: There was talk of arrest, but not of physical
extermination. This was not in the period prior to the Brest-Litovsk
Peace, but after. Before the Brest-Litovsk Peace the principal
orientation of the "Left Communists" was to gain a majority in
the Party by legal means •...
VYSHINSKY: What legal means?
BUKHARIN: Discussions, voting at meetings, and so on.
VYSHINSKY: And when did the hope of this disappear?
BUKHARIN: That was after the Brest-Litovsk Peace. I want
to clarify this question in order to refute V. N. Yakovleva 's
evidence. She speaks of a period prior to the Brest-Litovsk Peace,.
which is patent nonsense, because at that time we and the Trotskyites had the majority in the Central Committee ·and we hoped to.
win the majority in the Party; so that to speak of conspiratorial
activities at that time is nonsense. At that time I had 0ne conver..:
sation with Pyatakov, when Karelin and Kamkov came and said
that they proposed fo set up a new government.•..
VYSHINSKY: When was that? .
BUKHARIN: It was before the Brest-Litovsk Peace. They
proposed to form a government by arresting Lenin for 24 hours.
VYSHINSKY: And so we may say that prior to the conclusion
of the Peace of Brest-Litovsk you had a conversation with the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, Karelin and. Kamkov, about
the formation of a riew government, that is, by first overthrowing
the government headed by Lenin? Was there such a conversation?
BUKHARIN: There was.
VYSHINSKY: About the arrest of Lenin?

447

BUKHARIN: The Socialist-Revolutionaries spoke of that.
VYSHINSKY: As you put it, the Socialist-Revolutionaries·
'Spoke about the arrest of Lenin; but the witness Yakovleva affirms
that Bukharin too spoke about the arrest of Lenin.
BUKHARIN: She is mixing it up with another question. She
asserts that the conversation took place before the conclusion
<>f the Brest-Litovsk Peace.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, were there before the conclusion of
the Brest-Litovsk Peace negotiations with the Socialist-Revolutionaries about the arrest of Lenin?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And were there also negotiations after the
conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace?
BUKHARIN: After the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace
·
such a conversation really took place.
.
VYSHINSKY: And there had also been the other conversation?
BUKHARIN: The difference is that in the first conversation
a negative answer was given. ,
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you aboufthe answer, but about
the facts which took place. Was there a conversation with Karelin and Kamkov about the arrest of Lenin?
BUKHARIN: I confirm that there was.
VYSHINSKY: Before the Brest-Litovsk Peace?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And were there also negotiations after the
-conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace?
BUKHARIN: There were.
VYSHINSKY: What about?
BUKHARIN: About political contact.
VYSHINSKY: And about arrest?
BUKHARIN: And about the arrest of the trio Yakovleva
has mentioned.
VYSHINSKY: Of whom exactly?
BUKHARIN: Of Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov.
VYSHINSKY: Also for 24 hours?
BUKHARIN: This formula was not employed then.
VYSHINSKY: And how were they to be arrested? And what
for?
BUKHARIN: In order to form a new government.
VYSHINSKY: And what was to be done with the arrested?
BUKHARIN: There was no talk of physical extermination.
VYSHINSKY: But it was not precluded?
BUKHARIN: On the contrary, we all thought that the safety
of these persons must be guarded at all costs.

448

VYSHINSKY: When a government is overthrown and arrested, are not forcible methods resorted to?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you envisage adopting forcible methods
when making the arrest? Is this true or not?
BUKHARIN: It is.
VYSHINSKY: But what do forcible methods involve? Did
you determine that precisely?
BUKHARIN: No, we did not.
VYSHINSKY: And so you decided to act as circumstances
permitted and dictated?
BUKHARIN: just so.
VYSMINSKY: But circumstances might dictate very decisive
action?
BUKHARIN: Yes, but the fact is that neither did the "Left
Communists" hold a fatalistic standpoint, but r~ckoned with the
circumstances. This did not mean that circumstances dictated
anything and everything.
VYSHINSKY:).'Let us for the present establish what is undisputed. Before the Brest-Litovsk Peace there was talk about the
arrest of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin; after the Brest-Litovsk Peace
there were negotiations about the arrest of Lenin, Stalin and·Sverdlov
and the forcible overthrow of the government. Is that correct?
BUKHARIN: It is correct on the whole.
VYSHINSKY: Moreover, when the forcible overthrow of the
Soviet power and the arrest of Comrades Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov were spoken of, forcible methods were actually spoken of,
but which exactly were not mentioned?
BUKHARIN: That is so. All that was said was that their
safety must be guaranteed at all costs.
VYSHINSKY: Witness Yakovleva, what do you say to this?
Is Bukharin speaking the truth?
YAKOVLEVA: I was not present during his negotiations with
the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
- VYSHINSKY: What did he tell you?
YAKOVLEVA: He told me that such a possibility was not
precluded.
VYSHINSKY: What possibility?
YAKOVLEVA: That the possibility of physical extermination,
that is, assassination, was not precluded.
VYSHINSKY: Did be speak to you about this?
YAKOVLEVA: He did.
VYSHINSKY: And he did not say that this was absolutely
precluded, because the safety and inviolability of these persons.
was assured?
YAKOVLEVA: I did not hear him say that.
29

449

· VYSHTNSKY: ·And about assassination?
YAKOVLEVA: That I did hear, but I repeat that this conversation was of such a character that he did not stress the matter... VYSHINSKY: But he spoke about it?
Y AKOVLEVA: He did.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions to put to Bukharin
and Yakovleva.
BUKHARIN: Have I the right to question the witness?
THE PRESIDENT: You have.
BUKHARIN: I have many questions to ask.
VYSHlNSKY: Perhaps we could leave it to the evening session.
THE PRESIDENT: Since according to the procedure thereis to be an adjournment at three o'clock, I now declare theadjournment.
VYSHINSKY: Excuse me, if we are going to suspend theexamination of the witness Yakovleva until the evening session,
I request the opportunity to make a few remarks.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY:- Firstly, about a statement connected with thecharge brought against the accused Pletnev and Levin. I want fo.
submit this statement to the Counsel of the accused mentioned, and
then request permission to read it.
(The statement is submitted to the Counsel for Defence).
THE PRESIDENT: Have the Counsel for Defence acquainted themselves with the statement?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: The Counsel for De ...
fence has no objection to the statement being attached to the records.
THE PRESIDENT: The Court attaches the statement to the
records.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to read the statement. (Reads.)
"To the Procurator of the U.S.S.R., Comrade Vyshinsky,
"Having acquainted myself with the indictment publishect·
on March 3, 1938, in the case of the conspiratorial bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites, I consider it my duty to inform you of the following:
"In my capacity as physician of the Medical Administration
of the Kremlin, I was assigned to Alexei Maximovich Gorky at
his summer house during his last illness for the performance of
intravenous infusions.
"I perfectly recall that in the early days of A. M. Gorky's.
illness he was given many heart stimulants which were administered both internally and by means of intravenous infusions,.
and injections.
"Thus, I personally, on the instructions of the physicians in
attendance, and chiefly of L. G. Levin, performed the following
450

injections and intravenous infu3ions: digalen, cardiosol, glucose, and glucose together with strophanthus and strophanthin
(I think it was German).
"l draw your attention to the fact that from the very early
days of A. M. Gorky's illness these heart stimulants were administered in large quantities.
''During one of the infusions of strophanthin I expressed to
Dr. L. G. Levin my doubts about the use of strophanthin, which
caused me alarm and which I feared to administer. It is significant that Levin at once discontinued further infusions of strophanthin. This is all the more remarkable because I am not a therapeutical specialist and from this standpoint my opinion, under
normal conditior:s, could not have been of any particular importance to Dr. L. G. Levin.
"lt must also be mentioned that the infusion of strophanthin
(intravenous) was performed in conjunction with digalen (during
this period).
"About ten days before A. M. Gorky's death, Prof. Pletnev,
who had come to Gorky's summer residence for consultation purposes, seeing that I was preparing to make the usual infusion (I
do not remember of what exactly), cynically said to me: 'Why
do you do that? A patient in such a condition should be allowed
to die in peace.'
"I at once reported Pletnev's statement to Dr. Levin, who said
that the infusions should be continued.
"If necessary, I can confirm the above in Court and I answer for
what I have written.
"Dr. M. Y. Belostotsky."
VYSHINSKY: I request the Court to have Dr. Belostotsky
summoned to give evidence as a witness.
At the same time, in order to elucidate the circumstances connected with the slayin~ of A. M. Gorky, Comrades Menzhinsky and
Kuibyshev and M.A. Peshkov, Gorky's son, and with the attempt
on the life of Comrade N. l. Yezhov, I request that a commission
of medical experts be appointed, consisting of the following:
1. Prof. Nikolai Adolfovich Shereshevskyt Scientist of Merit,
2. Prof. Dmitry Aiexandrovich Burmin, Scientist of Merit,
3. Prof. Vladimir Nikitich Vinogradov,
4. Prof. Dmitry Mikhailovich Rossisky,
5. Vladimir Dmitrievich Zipalov, Doctor of Medicine.
If my request to appoint a commission of medical experts
consisting of the persons mentioned is granted, permit me to submit the questions to them at the evening session.
THE PRESIDENT: Has the Counsel for Defence any objection to
summoning the witness and appointing the commission of experts?
29*

451

· COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: The Counsel for
Defence have no objection to summoning the witness and the
experts.
THE PRES ID ENT: The Court grants the request of Comrade
Vyshinsky, Procurator of the U.S.S.R., to summon Dr. Belostotsky,
Maximilian Yulianovich, as a witness, and also to the summoning
of an expert commission consisting of the five persons mentioned
by the Procurator, Comrade Vyshinsky.
Adjournment till 6 p.m.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT :

V. ULRICH
Anny Military Jurist

President of the Military Collegllim of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER
Military Jurist First Rank

EVENING SESSION, MARCH 7, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
·
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Comrade Commandant, call witness Yakovleva. (Witness YakovIeva enters the Court.) Accused Bukharin, have you any questiontl
to put to witness Yakovleva?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I have several, if you will allow me.
THE PRESIDENT: Please.
BUKHARIN: Firstly, I wish to ask witness Yakovleva whether
she is aware that I was the first during the struggle against
Trotsky to give publicity to the conversation with Kamkov ana
Karelin?
YAKOVLEVA: I am aware of that, but I am also aware ot
the po int that when Bukharin, in the beat of the Party's struggle
against Trotsky, reported on this fact, he did not tell the whole
story, far from it.
BUKHARIN: That's another question....
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, let her finish.
YAKOVLEVA: He did not have the courage to pull the whole
curtain aside, and only raised a tiny corner of it. I am aware of
that too.
THE PRESIDENT: What other questions are there?
BUKHARIN: I have another question....
VYSHINSKY: Excuse me. I have a question to put to witness
Yakovleva. What in your opinion did Bukharin conceal, what did
he suppress?
YAKOVLEVA: He suppressed all that I have told the Court
today.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say?
YAKOVLEVA: That is to say, the fact that there was a plot
between the "Left Communists" and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
VYSHINSKY: It was organized with the direct, active,
leading •..
YAKOVLEVA: ... part being played by Bukharin himself.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): Is that true?
453

BUKHARIN: What I testified is true.
VYSHINSKY: Is that true?
BUKHARIN: What Yakovleva says regarding the period prior
to the Brest-Litovsk Peace is untrue.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): I am not talking of that. Is it
true that you were one of the organizers ·of the plot against the
Soviet power, that is to say, of the plot of the "Left Communists" and the "Left" Soctahst-Revolutionaries?
BUKHARIN: I testified to that effect. Now I wish to ask whether witness Yakovleva was aware that Kuibyshev, Menzhinsky
and Yaroslavsky belonged to the ''Left. Communists"?
VYSHINSKY: I ask this question to be ruled out as having no
bearing on the case.
THE PRESIDENT: You need not answer this question, as it has
no bearing on the case.
BUKHARIN: Then I ask Citizen the President to explain to me
whether I have the right to put such questions as I wish, or
whether my questions are determined by Citizen the Procurator.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, Yakovleva was called
here to give testimony as to your anti-Soviet activity, the activity
Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin. In connection with her testimony
you wished to put several questions to her in relation to matters
concerning you, and not any other persons.
BUKHARIN: Quite so, but I ask for an explanation from Citizen
the President as to whether I have the right to put such questions
as I consider necessary to put, or whether their character is determined by someone else, partkul:uly, by Citizen the Procurator.
In that case, of course, I cannot put questions.
THE PRESIDENT: You p1t one qt.estion and received a reply
to it. Do you still wish to put questions?
BUKHARIN: Yes, very much so.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to make the following remark: I consider it necessary to explain Article 257 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which defines, firstly, that the President guides the Court
investigation, and, secondly, that at the Court investigation the
President rules out of the Court investigation and the speeches for
the prosecution and the defence all points that have no bearing
on the case under trial.
BUKHARIN: Then, Citizen Procurator, I ask for an explanation ....
THE PRESIDENT: Citizen the Procurator will give vou no
explanation.
BUKHARIN: Then I ask Citizen the President of the Court to
explain to me whether the question of the composition of the central group of the "Left Commumsts" has any bearing on the case
or not?

of

454

THE PRESIDENT: I completely rule out your question.· Have
you any questions to witness Yakovleva as far as you are con·cerned, or not?
BUKHARIN: I still have a number of questions.
VYSHINSKY: I ask permission to explain the contents of Arti·
.de 257 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to Bukharin, in order to
..avoid further misunderstanding, and to ensure that the accused
Bukharin does not put such questions in the future.
THE PRESIDENT: I quote Article 257 of the Code <lf Criminal Procedure of the R.S.F.S.R.:
"The president at a Court trial shall direct the course of
the trial, endeavour to keep the Court investigathm and
the speeches for the prosecution and the defence free of everything extraneous to the case under examination, and direct
the Court investigation in the way best calculated to elicit
the truth."
BUKHARIN: Am I to understand this as meaning that you
>bar this question as having no relation to the point at issue?
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, if you have questions
to witness Yakovleva, put specific questions to her.
BUKHARIN: Yes, I have questions. I ask witness Yakovleva
to say whether she denies that in the Central Committee prior to
·the Brest-Litovsk Peace the majority of the votes was held by the
"''Left Communists" plus the Trotskyites.
THE PRESIDENT: What bearing has this question on your
·Criminal role?
BUKHARIN: It has this much bearing, that I wish thereby to
motivate and explain the point that it was absolutely senseless to
·strive for a plot ...
THE PRESIDENT: The Court is interested in yout role in
the plot against the leaders of the Soviet government, and this
is now the subject of the testimony.
BUKHARIN: Good, then allow me to put the following question.
Does witness Yakovleva deny that the "Left Communists" prior
io the Party Congress strove to receive a majority in the Party by
.legal means?
THE PRESIDENT: The question has nothing whatever to do
·with the charge preferred against you of organizing a plot against
·the Soviet power, and therefore 1 rule it irrelevant.
BUKHARIN: Does Yakovleva deny that I was one of the mem·.bers of the Presidium of the Congress in Moscow, one of the
members of the Presidium which at the time of the murder of
Mirbach arrested the faction of ''Left'' Socialist-Revolutionaries?
THE PRESIDENT: This question has no bearing whatsoever
-0n your criminal activity. I rule it irrelevant.
BUKHARIN: Does witness Yakovleva deny that in 1919 I was
455

wounded at a meeting of the Moscow Committee by a "Left"'
Socialist-Revolutionary bomb?
.
THE PRESIDENT: This question has nothing whatever to do
with the charge against you of being concerned in a plot. I rule this
question irrelevant also.
BUKHARIN: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any ques~
tions to witness Yakovleva?
VYSHINSKY: I have a question to Bukharin. For all that,
I am interested in whether you were one of the organizers of theplot against the Soviet power in 1918.
BUKHARIN: I, Citizen Procurator, gave testimony on this.
point and had a confrontation in your presence. I stated that
I admitted myself ...
VYSHINSKY: I ask you. If you choose to answer, speak; if
you do not, don't reply. I ask you, in 1918 were you one of the organizers of the plot of "Left Communists" and "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries against the Soviet power?
BUKHARIN: Of the preparation of such a plot, yes.
VYSHINSKY: Despite all the questions you have put to witness Yakovleva, this question can be solved thus: that you were one
of the organizers of a plot against the Soviet power.
BUKHARIN: But I am speaking of exact dates and exact facts,.
and say: Yes, there was a moment when I was a participant in negotiations of a conspiratorial character, undertaken through Pyatakov.
VYSHINSKY: How long did this "moment" continue?
BUKHARIN: It continued for a comparatively short time,_
for the simple reason ...
VYSHINSKY: Approximately how long, though?
BUKHARIN: I think about several months.
VYSHINSKY: A moment of your conspiratorial activity iD
1918 that continued for several months.
BUKHARIN: This activity was expressed in negotiations.
VYSHINSKY: In negotiations, calculated on success, in preparing all kinds of measures, etc.
With whom specifically did you conduct negotiations about the
plot?
BUKHARIN: I admit two criminal conversations.
The first conversation was with Karelin, Pyatakov and Kamkov
prior to the Brest-Litovsk Peace.
VYSHINSKY: You consider this conversation a criminal one?·
BUKHARIN: I consider the conversation a criminal one be-:
cause ...
VYSHINSKY: I did not ask why. I only asked, do you consider:
this conversation a criminal one?
456

BUKHARIN: Yes, I think it was. Another criminal conversation took place with Pyatakov, who was commissioned to conduct
negotiations of a simi Iarcharacter with the group of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, with Kamkov, Karelin and somebody else.
VYSHINSKY: Did you personally have any dealings with anv
oF the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries on the question of the
plot?
BUKHARIN: I had no dealings on these questions.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have any conversation with Karelin?
BUKHARIN: I had a general conversation with Karelin, but
had no conversations regarding a plot. And then a catastrophic
change in the situation took place, I was sent to Germany.
VYSHINSKY: Excuse me, did you have no conversation with
Karelin? .
BUKHARIN: I did not.
VYSHINSKY: And with Kamkov?
BUKHARIN: Nor with Kamkov.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you: did you, in 1918, in connection with
your conspiratorial plans, have a conversation with Kamkov,
member of the Central Committee of the Party of "Left" Socialist-T~evolutionaries? Did you or did you not?
BUKHARIN: I say I did not. I had one conversation ..•
VYSHINSKY: Excuse me. Did you or did you not? You can't
answer that way. Did you or did you not have a: conversation?.
BUKHARIN: I did not after the Brest-Litovsk Peace, but.
prior to the Brest-Litovsk Peace I had one conversation.
. VYSHINSKY: I ask you: did you have a conversation with
Kamkov regarding a plot, on a subject of a conspiratorial character'(
BUKHARIN: I have said that prior to the Brest-Litovsk
Peace I had one conversation, but it cannot be interpreted as you
are doing.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to cite Vol. IV, p. 92, where Kamkov testifies as follows: "Bukharin told me: the struggle within
our Party against Lenin's position on the Brest-Litovsk Peace
is assuming acute forms. Within our ranks the question is being
discussed of creating a new government consisting of 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries and 'Left Communists.' Bukharin mentioned
Pyatakov as a possible candidate for leader of the new government,
and stated that the idea was to bring about. the change of government by arresting its members, headed by Lenin."
Did such a conversation take place?
BUKHARIN: Not quite such, but something like it.
VYSHINSKY: Something hke it. I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Witness Yakovleva, you are not need~d any longer.
457

VYSHINSKY: I would ask that she be left in the Court room
during the examination of other witnesses for confrontations that
may be necessary.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Commandant, ask witness Ossinsky in. (Witness Ossmsky enters the Court.)
THE PRESIDENT (to Ossrnsky): ls your name Valerian
Valenanov1ch Ossinsky?
OSSINSKY: Qmte so.
THE PRESIDENT: You are called here as a witness in the
Bukharin case. You are asked to testify the truth.
OSSINSKY: At your service.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any questions to put to Ossinsky?
VYSH INS KY: Yes, of course.
THE PRESIDENT: Very well.
VYSHINSKY: Witness Ossinsky, what do you know of the
activity of the accused Bukharir connected with his 'participation
in the group of so-called "Left Communists"? I speak of his cri minal activities. Do you know of any facts in this sphere or not;
if you do, then what facts?
OSSINSKY: Only relating to the year 1918, or to 1917 as well?
VYSHINSKY: If you have facts relating to 1917, then by all
means, I do not object.
OSSINSKY: Bukharin was the leader of the so-called "Left
Communist" faction, which took shape in the second half of November 1917 in connection with differences that arose on the question
-0f the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace with the Central
Powers. Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin was the leader of this faction,
in which I also took part as a member of the centre. In the beginning, the activity of the faction followed legal lines, although from
the very outset the struggle against Lenin's Party leadership was
·exceptionally acute, and gradually grew more so; by February
1918 the struggle found expression in the resolution of the Moscow
Regional Bureau of the Party, regarding which Lenin wrote his
.article "Strange and Monstrous." As is well known, in this resolution the Moscow Regional Bureau declared in advance that
·should the Brest-Litovsk Peace be concluded, the Soviet power
would become a mere formality, and that it, the bureau, would
not subordinate itself to instructions coming from the Central
-Committee led by V. I. Lenin. This was the legal expression of the
great sharpening of the anti-Party struggle waged by the "Left
-communist" faction. Simultaneously with this, illegal criminal
.activity was also begun.
The first information I received regarding this side of the
.activity of the "Left Commumst" faction led by Bukharin was
at the beginning of March 1918 from V. N. Yakovleva (one of
458

the active members of the group of "'Left Ctimmuni sts"). My official
position at that time was that of chairman of the Supreme Council
-0f National Economy. I had been away, had been in Kharkov and
returned in the first week or so of March to Leningrad, where I had
my permanent abode at that time. On my return I met with Varvara
Nikolayevna Yakovleva as my immediate assistant in the Supreme
Council of National Economy (where she was busiress manager).
Yakovleva told me what had taken place in my absence and informed
me that an illegal meeting of the Moscow Regional Bureau and
-0f other "Left Communists" had taken place, in which Bukharin,
Yakovleva, Lomov, Mantsev, Stukov and others had participated.
At this meeting the question had been raised that a very sharp
and vigorous line must be taken against Lenin's leadership of the
Party and the Soviets, the line of seizing power, of overthrowing
Lenin's government and placing it under arrest; Yakovleva stated
that Bukharin was inclined to the idea that with the arrest of
Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, the necessity would arise of physically
removing, or, to speak more clearly, of exterminating them as the
three most outstanding Party and Soviet leaders, as the people
-carrying on a most consistent struggle for the conclusion of the
Brest-Litovsk Peace, the most dangerous opponents of the "Left
Communists."
At the preliminary investigation I answered from memory
that Bukharin had also taken part in this meeting. I cannot make
this assertion for certain, but what I can assert with absolute
certainty is that these proposals were introduced and adopted by
the inner circle of members of the Moscow Regional Bureau on the
initiative, on the instructions and with the complete agreement
of Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: But what grounds have you for asserting that
these proposals were adopted on the initiative, on the instructions
and with the complete agreement of Bukharin?
OSSINSKY: That was what Yakovleva told me. Simultaneously
with this, a proposal was introduced about the formation of a
bloc with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and the conduct
-0f negotiations in this direction with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. These negotiations were to be conducted, on the one
hand, by Stukov and Bukharin, and, on the other hand, by the
"'Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries Kamkov, Karelin and Proshyan.
It was then decided to prepare the Moscow Regional Party organization for the appropriate action to seize power and arrest the
government. It was mtended to time the action for the arrival
of the government in Moscow, since here was the main citadel of
the "Left Communists"-the Moscow Regional Bureau, which
was in our hands-and it was therefore natural to concentrate
such action at that point and to fix it for that moment. I came
459

to the conclusion that I must ask Bukharin himself about this.
Our conversation took place a couple of days later. I put the question to Bukharinas to whether Yakovleva had exactly passed on the
decisions adopted by the inner circle of members of the Regional
Bureau according to his, Bukharin's, line. Bukharin confirmed
the point that Yakovleva had given me an exact outline of the
decision, and that he agreed with this decision. I then asked him
whether, if a line was taken for an undertaking fraught with such
vast consequences, Bukharin could state that this undertaking had a sufficiently solid political basis and whether one could
consider the combined efforts of the "Left Communists" and
Socialist-Revolutionaries to be such a basis. In reply to this question Bukharin stated that my question and the element of doubt
that it contained were justified, that he was already taking steps
to provide the plan outlined with a wider basis. He gave me a
review and characterization of the political groupings-both
inside and outside the Party-that could be drawn into this bloc.
First of all, he spoke in this connection of Zinoviev and Kamenev
and of those who surrounded them, and put the question in this
way: at first sight it might appear that Zinoviev and Kamenev
were not suitable partners to be drawn into such a bloc, because
Zinoviev was then (and that was the case) making speeches at
meetings, making reports, etc., in favour of the Brest-Litovsk
Peace; but this behaviour of Zinoviev and Kamenev was only a
very artful double game, calculated primarily on restoring confidence in themselves both among the Party leadership and the
masses of Party members, a confidence seriously undermined by
the blackleg behaviour in the pre-October and October days of
these people, whose reputation had been very seriously damaged.
By coming forward as a umt solid with the Party leadership they
st.rove above all to restore this confidence. But this by no means
·m lied that they had abandoned their intention of waging a
str ggle against the Party leadership.
inoviev and Kamenev regarded the situation thus: the Sociali revolution in Russia could not be successful, Russia was destined
/ o become transformed into a bourgeois-democratic state, and hence
they considered the Brest-Litovsk Peace to be a defeat for Lenin's
policy. In order to conduct a struggle against the Party they were
ready, by reason of their lark of principle, to form a bloc with anybody at all, including the "Left Communists." Therefore they wanted negotiations, and negotiations had begun.
Bukharin stated that despite the damage undoubtedly done to.
the political reputations of these people, which they were striving to
recover, they possessed quite a following, and therefore could
prove to be quite a weighty factor in the bloc.
After this Bukharin proceeded to give an estimate of Trotsky's

~

460.

position, and stated that the situation with Trotsky was approximately the same as that with Zinoviev and Kamenev. Outwardly
Trotsky was not coming forward either as a supporter of the "Left
Communists" or as an opponent of the Brest-Litovsk Peace. To
outward appearance he occupied the intermediary position of
"Neither peace nor war." He had selected this position as a cover,
so as not to demonstrate openly that he was conducting a struggle
against Lenin. He was agreed to enter the bloc, where he would
prove to be quite a weighty factor. Bukharin spoke of a third force
that must be drawn into the bloc, being gathered together by the
"Left Communists." This was the Socialist-Revolutionaries. The
disagreements between the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and
the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries on the question of withdrawing Russia from the imperialist war were exceptionally acute.
The viewpoint of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries was that this
war must be continued to a victorious conclusion, while the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries supported the position of the Bolsheviks
on this question. But at that moment, when the "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries were opposing the Brest-Litovsk Peace, it was
absolutely clear that the disagreements on thi.s question had been
smoothed over, and that thus a certain identity of viewpoint was
being established between the "Left" and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, and that therefore the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries on
the one hand could be used as a framework that could be extended to
the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, thus enabling the basis
of the bloc to be extended, and also the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries could be included, who, it goes without saying, would
support any measure directed against the Party leadership and
against the measures of the Soviet power. Therefore in the struggle
against Lenin they would undoubtedly prove to be allies. The Right
Socialist-Revolutionaries still constituted quite a considerable political force, they had a considerable number of active supporters,
considerable contacts in the rural districts, and therefore their
incorporation would strengthen and extend this bloc.
When Bukharin finished the review of these propositions of
his, which at that time already had begun to be carried into effect,
I put the question to him as to why it was that such important
changes in the policy of the "Left Communist" faction were being
adopted independently, while I in particular had only just learnt
of the still further extension of the bloc. In reply to this Bukharin
told me that there was no need for me to feel offended, for I had
been away, while on the other hand such agreements and negotiations on such agreements demanded exceptionally strict secrecy, a
point on which, by the way, certain partners-to-be in this agreement, particularly Zinoviev and Kamenev, insisted; because, should
there be any exposure of such a secret prior to the plan outlined
461

being carried through, or should this plan meet with failure, any
publication of this secret would lead to all the participants 1n _this
affair being absolutely irreparably compromised. Therefore, srnce
I had put this question to him, he, as a member of the centre of
these "Left Communists," gave me this information, but I was not
to inform anybody of this, apart from those who know of it, and
was to keep the information I had received a stnct secret.
That was my conversation with Bukharin, which, so to speak,.
cleared up the point at that moment as to the direction being taken
by the activity of the "Left Communist" faction.
A few days later I had a conversation with V. N. Yakovleva.
She informed me that together with Bukharin she had had a conversation with Zinoviev, who had declared for a struggle against Lenin's government, and that Zinoviev was ready for an agreement
with us "Left Communists."
Subsequently I met Karelin, member of the Central Committee
of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, the only leader of the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries whom I had known from prerevolutionary times. And so, aware that negotiations were to be
conducted with him, and that therefore I was not violating
secrecy in this respect, I raised the question: "How about the
agreement regarding the proposal made by Bukharin to you concerning the seizure of power, the arrest of the government connected with this, and all the consequences following therefrom?''"
That approximately was how I expressed myself. In reply to this
Karelin stated that all these proposals were acceptable, that the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries were accepting them, and that
they were making the corresponding preparations in their organization for the fulfilment of these decisions.
Here I must remark that on meeting Yakovleva and Lomov,.
who were members of the Moscow Regional Bureau, I received the
information from them that the Moscow Regional organization was
also preparing to undertake the necessary action at the right moment. Subsequently, at a much Iatertime, l<igaininquiredof Bukharin as to whether the bloc had taken complete shape and whether
the negotiations were concluded. This was at the end of April or
the beginning of May. Bukharin told me in reply that the bloc was
established, that all the political groupings indicated had declared
their agreement to join the bloc, and had joined forces on this basis.
Later, however, as is well known, this plan fell through and was not
put into operation. This took place, as is well known, asa result of
the following circumstances. At the May conference ...
VYSHINSKY: The plan fell through. That's all to the goodWe are interested in the facts which actually did take place.
462

OSSINSKY: This in fact is the point to which I shall pass.
with the aid of a certain intervening link.
VYSHINSKY: By all means. Only you have been called here
as a witness at my request, and what interests me is not what did
not take place, but what did.
OSSINSKY: Well, this plan was not fulfilled because at the
conference of the Moscow Regional Party organization held in May.
the "Left Communists" met with deftat, were thoroughly routed
by Lenin, and the basis for the execution of this plan was, as far
as the "Left Communists" were concerned, knocked out of their
hands. This led to considerable confusion rn the ranks of the "Left
Communists." The revolt of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries
was carried through in fulfilment of the plan out ii ned by us "Left
Communists," but it was crushed. This revolt was precisely one of
the results of the fulfilment of the line adopted by the "Left Communists" as far back as the end of February 1918. A further result
of the line of the bloc ...
VYSHINSKY: So then you assert that the revolt of the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries in July 1918 was carried through by the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries in accordance with the line
drawn up by the "Left Communists." Whose line ~as this?
OSSINSKY: The line of the bloc.
VYSHINSKY: Which bloc?
OSSINSKY: The bloc made up of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, "Left Communists," Zinovievites and Trotskyites.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently the plans of this bloc included • : .?
OSSINSKY: The plans of this bloc included, first of all, the
seizure of power.
VYSHINSKY: And for this?
OSSINSKY: For this armed action was needed.
VYSHINSKY: Now was it the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries who carried through this armed action in July 1918?
OSSINSKY: Without any doubt whatsoever.
VYSHINSKY: But Bukharin interested himself here in asking
of witness Yakovleva, who was examined before you, how it
could be, since he was engaged in crushing the "Left" SocialistRevolutionary revolt. So it appears that he did not crush, but prepared the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary revolt. Is that how I am
to understand you?
. OSSINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Now can you, as a living witness, explain whether Bukharin suppressed the revolt of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries?
OSSINSKY: I know nothing of this.
VYSHINSKY: But did he prepare the revolt of the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries?
463

. OSSINSKY: Without a doubt, he prepared it ideologically
and prepared its organizational side by negotiating with the "Left',._
Socialist-Revolutionaries.
VYSHINSKY: Were the "Left Communists," including yourself, aware of the preparations for the revolt of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries at that time?
OSSINSKY: I, in particular, was not aware of the specific action. This was not my speciality. My political speciality was of a
literary and ideological kind.
VYSHINSKY: What were you aware of?
OSSINSKY: I was aware that the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries were conducting preparations for armed action.
VYSHINSKY: Were you as a "Left Communist," as a member
of the group of "Left Communists" and one of the leaders of this
group, aware of the fact that the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries
were preparing a revolt?
OSSINSKY: Yes, I was, and in the sense that in reply to the
question I put to Karelin as to whether this agreement had been
accepted and on what scale, I received the reply that it had been
fully accepted, and that the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries were
preparing to put it into operation.
VYSHINSKY: And was Bukharin informed of this?
OSSINSKY: Undoubtedly.
VYSHINSKY: Because he himself carried on the negotiations.
OSSINSKY: Of cou(se.
VYSHINSKY: And how do you know that he carried on negotiations?
OSSINSKY: I heard it from Yakovleva and from Bukharin
bimself.
VYSHINSKY: You heard it from Bukharin. And about the intended arrest of the government, from whom did you hear that?
OSSINSKY: I heard this first from Yakovleva, and then Bukharin corroborated it.
VYSHINSKY: And was it a plan not only to arrest the leaders
of the Party and government, but to assassinate them too?
OSSINSKY: It is beyond doubt that a plan of this kind existed
as a guiding line and a main perspective in settling the question of
~hat was to be done with the arrested members of the government.
VYSHINSKY: Whom concretely?
OSSINSKY: Lenin, Stalin, Sverdlov.
VYSHINSKY: From }Vhom did you find out that it was the
intention of the bloc of conspirators to assassinate Comrades Lenin,
Stalin and Sverdlov in 1918?

464

OSSINSKY: From Yakovleva in the first place, and then from
Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: Did Bukharin personally corroborate this intention?
OSSINSKY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And what was your attitude to this?
OSSINSKY: What was my attitude? Do you want to know my
political attitude or my subjective attitude? However, I'll put my
subjective attitude aside. Since I did not oppose this and
did not object, consequently I agreed with this.
VYSHINSKY: And you did not inform anybody about this?
OSSINSKY: I did not inform anybody, consequently I agreed
with this.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions .
. THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, have you any questions
to put to witness Ossinsky?
BUKHARIN: I have. In the first place, I should like to ask
Ossinsky whether he could tell us something about the central
group of the "Left Communists" in Petersburg. Whom did it
consist of?
THE PRESIDENT: This question has no bearing on the conspiracy.
BUKHARIN: It has, because inasmuch as negotiations were
carried on ...
THE PRESIDENT: We are now concerned with the accused
Bukharin.
BUKHARIN: Why, I am appearing here as a representative
of the group of "Left Communists" and its centre. When we are
asked about the Right and Leftist centre, that concerns us, but
if it relates to the centre of the group of "Left Communists," we
cannot talk....
THE PRESIDENT: In any event the case concerns Nikolai
Ivanovich Bukharin.
BUKHARIN: Citizen the Procurator stated that this was not
the case because, owing to the lapse of the time limit prescribed
by law, there is no case.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, do you want to put
questions to witness Ossinsky?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I do. I want to ask witness Ossinsky whether
Ossinsky was a member of the central group of "Left Communists."
OSS INS KY: Of course I was.
BUKHARIN: I want to find out from witness Ossinsky whether
he wrote the general theses which served as the main platform of
the "Left Communists" in that period.
OSSINSKY: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: Together with whom did you write those theses?
30

465

OSSINSKY: Together with Bukharin, Radek and Preobra~
zhensky.
BUKHARIN: And who was the author of the basic text of
those theses?
OSSINSKY: The author of the basic text was Ossinsky.
VYSHINSKY: And who edited it?
OSSINSKY: It was edited by all those participating, including
Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin.
BUKHARIN: Then I should like to ask witness Ossinskv
whether he was in Moscow on the eve of the October uprising.
OSSINSKY: Yes, on the eve of the October uprising I was
in Moscow.
BUKHARIN: I should also like to know whether witness
Ossinsky was in Moscow during the October uprising.
THE PRESIDENT: What need is there for these questions?
BUKHARIN: I need them for my defence, because later on
I will have no opportunity to get answers to these questions.
VYSHINSKY: If the accused Bukharin states that he needs
these questions for his defence and since, according to our laws,
each accused has the right to defence in its full scope, I plead
that this question be not ruled out.
BUKHARIN: In this case I plead for putting again all the
questions which the Court ruled out before.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin, do not engage in obstructing the work of the Court.
VYSHINSKY: If the accused Bukharin has need of putting all
these questions for his defence, I, as Prosecutor, do not object
to these questions being put here.
THE PRES ID ENT: But the Court objects to these questions
being put here, because they have no bearing on the case.
VYSHINSKY: I submit to the decision of the Court.
BUKHARIN: I submit, too.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Commandant, call witness
Mantsev.
(Witness Mantsev enters the Court.)
THE PRESIDENT (to Mantsev): Are you Vasily Nikolayevich
Mantsev?
MANTSEV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: You have been called as a witness in the
case of Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin. You are requested to tell
the truth.
Comrade Procurator, have you any questions to put to witness
Mantsev?
VYSHINSKY: I have. Witness Mantsev, did you belong to the
group of "Left Communists" in 1918?
MANTSEV: Yes, I did.
466

VYSHINSKY: What was your role in this group, that of a
rank-and-file ·member, or a leading role?
MANTSEV: A leading role.
VYSHINSKY: Who were the other most active members of
this group?
MANTSEV: The centre for all the practical work of the "Left
Communists" was the Moscow Regional Bureau, the leading
nucleus of which was made up entirely of "Left Communists."
Bukharin was the leader of the faction of the "Left Communists."
VYSHINSKY: What were the relations between the group of
the "Left Communists" and the group of the "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries at that time? Do you remember?
MANTSEV: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Can you tell us briefly about it?
MANTSEV: I can. As early as the month of April, after the
Seventh Congress of the Party and the Fourth Congress of Soviets,
I learnt that the leadership o.f the faction of "Left Communists"
was carrying on negotiations about a bloc, about an alliance with
the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries with the conspiratorial
object of overthrowing the Soviet government, for the purpose of
effecting a counter-revolutionary coup. At one of the meetings
of the Regional Bureau, at which almost all the members of the
faction of "Left Communists" were present in full force-Yakovleva, myself, Lomov, Maksimovsky, Stukov, Kizelshtein and a
number of others who took an immediate part in directing the
activities of the faction-Bukharin, delivered a report in which he
declared that, after the Brest-Litovsk Peace had been endorsed
by the Congress of the Party and the Congress of Soviets, there was
only one road left-the road of insurrection against the Soviet government, of overthrowing the Soviet government. In the course of
the same report he stated that he considered it an indispensable condition for the success of the coup to arrest and, in case of necessity,
to physically exterminate, in plain words to murder, the leaders of the Party and the government-Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov.
VYSHINSKY: Did you hear it yourself?
MANTSEV: Yes, I heard it myself, just as all those who were
present at that meeting heard it. Then he stated that he was carrying on, or rather that he had brought to a successful issue, negotiations with "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries concerning an alliance
with them; he also. informed those who at that time were in the
leadership of the faction that the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries,
like the "Left Communists," were then preparing for an insurrection against the Soviet government. Bukharin confirmed the existence of an alliance between the "Left Communists" and the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries for the purpose of overthrowing
the Soviet government. He said that he personally conducted the

3C*

46.7

negotiations. I also heard that, of the "Left Communists," the
following people took part in these negotiations: Stukov and
Ossinsky.
At this meeting Bukharin was instructed to continue the negotiations with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
VYSHINSKY: Is this all?
MANTSEV: No, not all.
VYSHINSKY: Proceed.
MANTSEV: The fact of the matter is that earlier, in February,
it was not Bukharin who delivered a report, but ...
VYSHINSKY: What year was that?
MANTSEV: 1918. Stukov delivered a report, and he declared
at the time that he was speaking on Bukharin's direct ipstructions.
Stukov was a member of the Regional Bureau of the Party and
one of the leaders of the faction of the "Ltft Communists."
I forgot to mention that Bukharin characterized the existing
Soviet government, which was headed by Lenin, as a government
betraying the interests of the proletarian revolution, as a bourgeois-kulak government. It was as early as February or towards
the end of February that Stukov, on Bukharin's direct instructions,
already then raised the question of overthrowing this government
and of making preparations for organizing an insurrection against
this government.
VYSHINSKY: When was that?
MANTSEV: That was towards the end of February 1918.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, was this circumstance recorded in
the minutes?
MANTSEV: That is what I want to speak about. It was recorded in the minutes.
VYSHINSKY: And what happened to those minutes?
MANTSEV: As a rule, the minutes of the meetings of the
Regional Bureau were recorded in the minutes book. This was an
ordinary office ledger in which the secretary entered the minutes.
At that time I was secretary, and before me it was Yakovleva.
The minutes were usually recorded either by me or by Yakovleva.
These minutes were recorded by me.
VYSHINSKY: And what happened to these minutes?
MANTSEV: Permit me to digress somewhat. At the Moscow
Regional Conference in 1918 the "Left Communists" suffered defeat. The majority of the conference declared in favour of the line
of the Central Committee of the Party, and towards the end of the
conference, during the elections, the list of the Central Committee
obtained a majority. Out of the seven members included in the
list of the Central Committee, five adhered to the line of the Central
Committee, to Lenin's line, and two of the elected were members
of the "Left Communists"-myself and Lomov.
468

At a meeting of the faction of the "Left Communists," which
took place at the end of the conference, it was decided to disband
the faction, and to discontinue factional activities. I must say that
this was insincere, because at the same meeting of the faction it was
decided that Lomov and myself should refuse to participate in
the work of the Regional Committee of the Party, the majority
of which consisted of adherents of the Central Committee. After
the meeting of the faction a flying meeting was held of the
former members of the Regional Bureau of the "Left Communists,"
at which all those of whom I have spoken were present. On a motion
of Bukharin, and for the purpose of concealing from the Party the
real stand taken by the "Left Communists" with regard to the
Central Committee of the Party and the government (and it consisted in the fact that we were preparing for the overthrow of the
government), this meeting commissioned Yakovleva and myself
to destroy that entry in the minutes of which I have spoken. And
this I did.
VYSHINSKY: Destroy it?
MANTSEV: Yakovleva and I destroyed these minutes that same
evening or at night.
VYSHINSKY: And you left nothing for history?
MANTSEV: We destroyed it then so that nothing was left at
that time and, consequently, for history.
VYSHINSKY: I have no questions to Mantsev, for the time
being.
BUKHARIN (to the Court): I have one question which consists
in the following: Does Citizen Mantsev remember that he, with
a detachment of the Cheka, conducted the operation against the
Anarchists-the allies of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries-who threw a bomb in Leontievsky Street, which bomb
exploded while it was hurtling through the air. Does Citizen Mantsev
confirm that he conducted this operation?
MANTSEV: Yes, I confirm it.
BUKHARIN: I have no more questions.
VYSHINSKY: What year was that?
MANTSEV: The end of 1919.
VYSHINSKY: Were you then a member of the group of "Left
Communists"?
MANTSEV: There was no such group then.
\lYSHINSKY: And when this group of "Left Communists"
existed, did you take action against the Socialist-Revolutionaries?
"MANTSEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for 15 minutes.

*

*

*
469

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Comrade Procurator, have you any more questions to put to
witness Mantsev?
VYSHINSKY: I have questions to put to Bukharin.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, what have you got to say
with regard to the testimony of witness Mantsev?
BUKHARIN: I must say the following with regard to the
testimony of witness Mantsev: I delivered a report at the bureau
of the Moscow organization; l do not remember it, but I do not
deny it either. However, I absolutely exclude the possibility that
I should have spoken in my report in the spirit which Mantsev
described here. As for the line for a forcible overthrow of the Soviet
government, I have already replied that there was such a moment,
and when it was, and that I admit. As for the statement that
I allegedly gave instructions with regard to the removal of some
passage from the minutes, I consider, in the first place, that ...
VYSHINSKY: Did you give such instructions?
BUKHARIN: I beg your pardon, I consider, in the first
place ...
VYSHINSKY: Did you give such instructions?
BUKHARIN: No, I gave no such instructions.
VYSHINSKY: But the minutes disappeared.
BUKHARIN: The minutes disappeared, that is an accomplished
fact, but I have ...
VYSHINSKY: Did they disappear by themselves?
BUKHARIN: No, not by themselves, but everything that
happens in the world, including the disappearance of minutes, you
cannot ...
VYSHINSKY: But did you have anything to do with it?
BUKHARIN: No, I had nothing to do with it.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you assert that Mantsev's testimony inthispart and the testimonyofwitnessYakovleva are false?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: How do you explain the fact that they are not
telling the truth?
BUKHARIN: You had better ask them about it.
VYSHINSKY: We shall ask them directly. Witnesses Yakovleva
and Mantsev, the accused Bukharin here says that in this case you
are not telling the truth about him. What can you say about this?
YAKOVLEVA: I can say the following. I heard Mantsev's
tes1imony. I was not present at this meeting where this decision
was adopted-it was a sort of flying faction meeting; and
it was apparently by chance that I was not present. Mantsev

470

simply conveyed to me the decision. When we were preparing the
material of the Regional Bureau, I heard that Bukharin insisted
that not the whole minutes but a certain part of the minutes
be removed, namely the part in which was recorded Stukov's
speech and the draft resolution which he proposed at the meeting
of the faction of the Regional Bureau. The reasons given were
that if this passage were left it might expose the illegal activities
of the "Left Communists" and serve to condemn the political
position of the Moscow Bureau. As I have already testified, Mantsev
and myself removed this passage.
VYSHINSKY: Witness Mantsev, what have you to say?
MANTSEV: I confirm the testimony which I have given. The
fact of the matter is that it was not at a faction meeting, but there
was a special meeting called for this purpose, at which Bukharin,
who knew that there was such an entry in the minutes of the former
members of the Regional Burec;u, of the members of the faction
of "Left Communists," made this proposal. The meeting was
called specially for this purpose, because it was a very small meeting
and did not last very long.
VYSHINSKY: A flying meeting?
MANTSEV: He proposed that these minutes be removed from
the minutes book in order to conceal the conspiratorial activities
of the "Left Communists."
VYSHINSKY: Were these the reasons he advanced?
MANTSEV: I do not remember whether Yakovleva was there,
but this passage was removed.
VYSHINSKY: You did it together with Yakovleva?
MANTSEV: Together with Yakovleva.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): And do you maintain your position?
BUKHARIN: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Now the following question: Accused Bukharin,
do you confirm that you had the intention of placing Comrades
Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov under arrest?
BUKHARIN: Yes, I confirm it, there was such a moment.
VYSHINSKY: Such a plan?
BUKHARIN: I do not say a plan.
VYSHINSKY: Such an intention?
BUKHARIN: Such an intention.
VYSHINSKY: Initiative?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And who was the initiator of this intention?
Was it you?
BUKHARIN: The initiator of this intention was Trotsky.
VYSHINSKY: Did Trotsky commission you with it?

47l

BUKHARIN: No, our relations were not of the kind that he
.
could commission me with anything.
VYSHINSKY: Why then did you accept Trotsky's initiative
and begin to put it into effect?
BUKHARIN: Because there was a certain inclination among
the leading group of the "Left Communists" to accept this 'plan.
VYSHINSKY: So you agreed with Trotsky's initiative, and
supported his initiative in the question of placing Lenin, Stalin
and Sverdlov under arrest, because you yourself had a similar plan?
BUKHARIN: In the question of negotiations with regard to
this with the leading group of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
VYSHINSKY: Was Trotsky the initiator of the idea of placing
Lenin, Sta Ii n and Sverdlov under arrest?
BUKHARIN: Yes, quite right.
VYSHINSKY: Did you agree to this?
BUKHARIN: Yes, quite right.
VYSHINSKY: Did you support this?
BUKHARIN: As a matter of fact I did.
VYSHINSKY: And you started negotiations with the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries about putting this plan into effect, is
that right?
BUKHARIN: Yes, that's right.
VYSHINSKY: With the object of forcible overthrow ...
BUKHARIN: With the object, as Trotsky formulated it at the
ti me, of forming a new Cabinet.
VYSHINSKY: A Cabinet?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: At the same time, it was not excluded, of course,
that forcible means would be adopted with regard to Lenin, Stalin
and Sverdlov?
BUKHARIN: Yes, if we consider that placing under arrest
is a forcible means ...
VYSHINSKY: And besides arrest?
BUKHARIN: No, nothing besides arrest; if you are referring to
physical extermination, I repeat that there was no mention of it.
VYSHINSKY: But what did Stukov report?
BUKHARIN: I do not know what Stukov said.
VYSHINSKY: Did Yakovleva speak to you about Stukov's
information?
BUKHARIN: Stukov gave no information whatever to Yakovleva in my presence.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you, did Yakovleva speak to you
about the report delivered by Stukov?
BUKHARIN: In my opinion, she did not.

472

VYSHINSKY: Witness Yakovleva, did you speak to Bukharin
about Stukov's report?
YAKOVLEVA: Stukov told me that it was on Bukharin's instructions that he delivered his report in which he argued in favour
of this affair. In this report Stukov spoke, as a prospect of the
development of the politica 1struggle, also of the arrest of the.government in the persons of .Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, and even; in
case of an intensification of the struggle, the_ possibility of the· physical extermination of these three leaders of the Party. I informed
Bukharin about this and he corroborated it.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, do you confirm this?
BUKHARIN: This is impossible, because Yakovleva is referring to this as relating to the period prior to the Brest-Litovsk
Peace, which, as I have already proved, I think, sufficiently convincingly, would be absurd from every point of view.
VYSHINSKY: You are speaking about the conclusions, while
I am speaking about the facts.
BUKHARIN: I deny the fact. When there are two people concerned, I have the right of proof by contrary proposition.
VYSHINSKY: Do you deny this fact?
BUKHARIN: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Of course? But they confirm it. (To Mantsev.)
You also confirm that there was talk about the physical extermination of Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov?
MANTSEV: Yes.
BUKHARIN: I object to what Yakovleva is saying because
she is referring to the period before Brest-Litovsk, while Ossinsky
is speaking about the period after Brest-Litovsk. They must first
agree between themselves ....
VYSHINSKY: And what period are you referring to?
BUKHARIN: I am referring to the second period, the second
period, when there was a plan of arrest, there was the intention, and
initiative, the author of which was Trotsky; it was actually
accepted and approved of.
VYSHINSKY: The initiative was not yours?
BUKHARIN: Since Trotsky ...
VYSHINSKY: Answer the question: yours, or not yours?
BUKHARIN: This was Trotsky's initiative, and I am not Trotsky; consequently, it was not mine.
VYSHINSKY: Do you repudiate the initiative?
BUKHARIN: I repudiate the initiative but I do not repudiate
the approbation.
VYSHINSKY: The reason I am putting the question this way
is that I have the testimony of the witnesses, who say that you,
together with Trotsky, were the initiator, that you were also the
initiator; that is why I am asking you, but you are denying it.
473

BUKHARIN: Yes, I deny it.
VYSHINSKY: But you have said that you approved of it?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And I am asking: When, after the Brest-Litovsk
Peace, you intended to arrest Comrades Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, was it for the purpose of overthrowing the government, was it
to be a part of the violent struggle? Do I understand you right?
BUKHARIN: Well, that's what I am saying: that it was intended, and that this particular act could have been accomplished
in such a way as to be violent but not sanguinary, and therefore
there can be no ...
VYSHINSKY: Violent but not sanguinary?
BUKHARIN: You arrested me, that is an act of violence; however, I am still alive, but perhaps I will not be alive and I am
almost certain of it, yet I am still alive, which is testified to by the
fact that I am speaking from this dock.
VYSHINSKY: This is an unnecessary digression from ihe interrogation.
BUKHARIN: I am telling you what was.
VYSHINSKY: I only want to establish where you drew the
line between violentarrest in the course of the struggle and murder.
Where did you draw the line?
BUKHARIN: There was talk at the time that it was necessarv
to ensure and guarantee the full safety of the mentioned persons.
VYSHINSKY: That is what you are asserting, but Yakovleva
says that it was exactly the other way around; so she is not telling
the truth?
BUKHARIN: I do not agree with this and I say that she is not
telling the truth.
VYSHINSKY: Hence Mantsev is not telling the truth either?
BUKHARIN: Yes, he also is not telling the truth. I am telling
what I knew, and as for what they knew, it is a matter of their conscience to tell about it.
VYSHINSKY: You must somehow explain the fact that three
of your former accomplices are speaking against you.
BUKHARIN: You see, I have neither sufficient material nor
the psychological requisites to clear up this question.
VYSHINSKY: You cannot explain.
BUKHARIN: Not that I cannot, I simply refuse to explain.
VYSHINSKY: Witness Ossinsky, do you categorically affirm
that you were aware from Bukharin of the proposed arrest and murder of Comrades Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov?
OSSINSKY: I confirm this. I have already said that I learnt
of this from Yakovleva in the formulation which I reported to Bukharin, who confirmed it.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently?

474

OSSINSKY: Bukharin is not speaking the truth now.
VYSHINSKY: Do you, witness Yakovleva, also think that
Bukharin is not speaking the truth?
YAKOVLEVA: Yes, I have said that I heard from Bukharin about the physical extermination of the three leaders of the
Party.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, in denying this now, Bukharin
is not speaking the truth?
YAKOVLEVA: Yes, Bukharin does not wish to speak the truth.
VYSHINSKY: But were there cases when Bukharin, while pretending to speak the truth, was not speaking the truth?
YAKOVLEVA: It seems to me that, while pretending to speak
the truth about the conspiracy of "Left Communists" and "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries, he is not speaking the truth. This is
already a historical fact. And now he himself admits, in reply to
your question he was compelled to state, that he has not told the
whole truth.
VYSHINSKY: Is this correct?
BUKHARIN: When I said ...
VYSHINSKY: Is it correct that at the time you did not tell
the who le truth?
BUKHARIN: At that time Yakovleva denied even this half
truth, but from this one cannot draw the conclusion that she is
speaking the truth.
VYSHINSKY: When we come to discuss her conduct we shaII
speak of her. But it is not only Yakovleva who speaks of this fact
now; Yakovleva and Ossinsky speak of it. ...
BUKHARIN: But they all denied this half truth.
VYSHINSKY (to Yakovleva): Why did you deny this at one
time?
YAKOVLEVA: We denied this at the time, I personally at any
rate, because we had then not yet disarmed ourselves in the struggle
against the Party and acted as people who wished to hide the truth
from the Party. But when we had disarmed ourselves we considered
it necessary to speak of everything that took place.
VYSHINSKY: Apparently Bukharin has not yet disarmed?
Y AKOVLEVA: Apparently.
THE PRESIDENT: I intend to allow all the witnesses to remain in the Court room for the time being.
V.YSHINSKY: I ask leave to put one more question to .Mantsev.
Witness Mantsev, tell the Court, please, about this operation
against the Anarchists' House, against this nest of anarchists, about
which Bukharin spoke.
MANTSEV: This was the anarchist organization which organized the explosion ·on the premises of the Moscow Committee of
the Communist Party.

475

VYSHINSKY: What relations had these anarchists to the
"Left Communists"?
MANTSEV: The "Left Communists" were not functioning then.
· VYSHINSKY: But when the "Left Communists" were functioning, did they have any relation to these anarchists?
MANTSEV: At that time this group, these anarchists, were
not in Moscow.
VYSHINSKY: In what capacity did you act in the liquidation
of this anarchist nest at that time?
MANTSEV: I acted against them in the capacity of Assistant
Chairman of the Moscow Extraordinary Commission.
VYSHINSKY: That means you acted not on your own personal
desire but in accordance with your official position?
MANTSEV: Yes, in accordance with the position I occupied.
VYSHINSKY: Wel1, was this attempt organized and directed
specially against Bukharin?
MANTSEV: Thisattempthadno relation to Bukharin whatsoever.
VYSHINSKY: But whom did it have relation to?
MANTSEV: The attempt was directed against the Moscow Committee of the Communist Party.
VYSHINSKY: And was Bukharin the secretary of the Moscow
Committee at that time?
MANTSEV: He was not the secretary.
VYSHINSKY: Was he present at this meeting of the Moscow
Committee?
MANTSEV: In my opinion, he was not.
BUKHARIN: What do you mean, I was not present? I was contused during the explosion.
MANTSEV: It is possible he was there, I do not remember it.
BUKHARIN: I was present and delivered a report on the conspiracy of the National Centre, the investigation of which I was conducting in the Cheka.
MANTSEV: I must say that this is of no essential importance for
the matter under discussion.
. VYSHINSKY: But Bukharin thinks that this attempt was directed against him.
.
MANTSEV: This is not correct. I personally conducted the arrests of these anarchists, I personally interrogated them, and not
one of the arrested even mentioned a word about an attempt against
Bukharin.
.
VYSHINSKY: That means Bukharin got into this business
accidentally?
MANTSEV: He got into it accidentally. These anarchists were
fighting against the Bolshevik Party and made their attempt
against the Moscow Committee of the Party. Bukharin had nothing
to do with it.

476

VYSHINSKY: That means this cannot be put down to Bukha·
rin's credit?
MANTSEV: No, it cannot.
Allow me to deal some more with the question as to who issued
the instructions on the physical extermination of the leaders of
the Party. I knew that besides the alliance with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, the "Left Communists" made common cause
with Trotsky. I learnt of this in the very last days preceding the
dissolution of the "Left Communist" group. But regarding the
conspiracy, regarding the proposed assassination, I knew that this
was the proposal of Bukharin, the leader of our faction.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have occasion to visit Trotsky and speak
to him on this subject?
MANTSEV: Yes, I visited Trotsky and spoke to him of this.
VYSHINSKY: Did Trotsky speak to you of the necessity of
murdering Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov?
MANTSEV: Yes, Trotsky spoke of this.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, when Bukharin declares that the
initiative came also from Trotsky, he is speaking the truth?
MANTSEV: Yes, in this case he is speaking the truth.
VYSHINSKY: That means, it can be said that Trotsky together
with Bukharin were planning to kill Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov?
MANTSEV: Yes, this is true.
VYSHINSKY: How did you come to know of this plan?
MANTSEV: I learnt of it from Yakovleva, from Trotsky
and others personally.
VYSHINSKY: Trotsky spoke of the necessity of murdering
Lenin and Stalin?
MANTSEV: Yes, he did.
VYSHINSKY: Did Bukharin tell you that he was himself
inciting the murder of Lenin and Stalin?
MANTSEV: This was a decision.
VYSHINSKY: Whose decision?
MANTSEV: A decision of the leading body of the "Left Communists. .,
VYSHINSKY: Taken on whose initiative?
MANTSEV: On the initiative of Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: Now tell the Court about 1919.
MANTSEV: After the dissolution of the faction at the Regional
Party Conference in May, the faction made a decision that Lomov
and myself, who had been elected to the Regional Bureau on the
Central Committee slate, should refuse to participate in the work of
the Regional Bureau. This was proof of hypocrisy. The very decision
regarding the dissolution of the "Left Communist" faction was insincere; the members of this faction continued to hold the same convictions as they had held before.

477

Personally, l had no contact nor meetings with the members of
the former "Left Communist" faction up to the autumn of 1919.
At that time I was engaged in work in the Moscow Extraordinary
Commission. In the autumn of 1919 I met such people as Kizelshtein, Maximovsky, Bukharin. These meetings, although not frequent, did take place. At that time, in connection with reverses at
the front and rum and famine in the country, we were inclined to
explain this in our conversations by the wrong policy of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party, the government and the military command. In this connection we spoke about the decisive
role Stalin was playing in matters relating to mihtary operations,
and therefore a number of reproaches were hurled against Stalin
in the course of these conversations. It was during this period that
I receivt:d a telephone call from Trotsky's secretariat inviting me,
on his instructions, to visit him at his home in the Kremlin. I went
to see him at once. Trotsky said that Bukharin had informed him
that I was now opposed to the policy pursued by the Central Committee of the Party and the government. He told me that to his
knowledge a number of ex-"Left Communists" were at present not
unwilling to resume the plans which they had outlined in 1918. In
characterizing the political situation at that time, Trotsky declared
that the situation of the Soviet government as a result of failures at
the front, ruin and famine was catastrophic. He declared that the
position at the front was such that the surrender of Moscow was i nevitable. According to his words, Stalin, who had decisive influence
upon Lenin, was to blame for this, and it was therefore necessary to
overthrow this government and form a government consisting of
people who were prepared to completely share the views of Trotsky
and Bukharin. At first he said that he had come to an agreement on
this with Bukharin.
Trotsky said that the removal of Stalin must be considered the
guarantee or the necessary condition of success. At the same ti me,
he pointed out that he wished to take advantage of one of the conflicts between himself and Stalin regarding questions pertaining to
the carrying out of military operations, and during one of his visits
to the front, to that section where Stalin was stationed, to effect
t~e arrest of Stalin, using for this his military unit, or, more precisely, Trotsky's personal bodyguard. I recall his words; he said that
in such a case Lenin and the Central Committee would capitulate.
In reply to my question as to what would happen if they did not
capitulate, he said: things will remain the same as in 1918.
After this I also had a meeting with Bukharin and told him of
this conversation. Bukharin told me that he was in full and complete solidarity with Trotsky regarding the latter's appraisal of the
situation and the steps Trotsky outlined. I spoke of this at the
preliminary investigation and I speak of it now.
478

VYSHINSKY: Consequently, a new attempt was made in 1919
by Trotsky and the '·Left Communists" to organize an anti-Soviet
conspiracy?
MANTSEV: Yes. Soon after this I had to leave Moscow, and
I do not know how the whole affair developed.
VYSHINSKY: But was this affair investigated?
MANTSEV: No, at that time this affair was not investigated.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
MANTSEV: Because I said nothing about it.
VYSHINSKY: But had you no occasio!l to speak with Trotsky
about it?
MANTSEV: It is about my conversation with Trotsky that I am
speaking.
· VYSHINSKY: Speaking to him about not having to investigate this affair?
MANTSEV: You are speaking of a different occasion, which
relates to 1920.
VYSHINSKY: And you are speaking of 1919?
MANTSEV: Yes. Of my conversation with Trotsky in 1919. This
was on the eve of the Red Army's offensive and the crushing of Denikin.
VYSHINSKY: You told no one about this and the affair was
buried?
MANTSEV. Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And how did things develop later? What took
p lac·e in 1920?
MANTSEV: At that time I was chairman of the All-Ukrainian
Extraordinary Commission and chief of the Special Department of
Front Headquarters. When Stalin was leaving Kharkov I was informed by the Chief of the Department of the Transport Cheka of
the Kharkov Rai !way junction that traces of an attempt on the
train and carriage in which Stalin was travellirtg had been discovered. An investigation was instituted, and investigator Gusakov,
who was investigator of the Presidium of the All-Ukrainian Cheka,
was assigned to handle the case. Trotsky arrived soon after this.
I must say that at that time I was also chief of the area behind the
lines. When reporting to Trotsky in his carriage, I mentioned among
other things this case. Trotsky smiled and said that it was not worthwhile to exaggerate the case because our comrades might suffer.
The investigation of this case was not brought to a conclusion, it
was referred to the Kharkov Revolutionary Tribunal, where further investigation was discontinued.
VYSHINSKY: So, upon whose direct instructions?
MANTSEV: This I do not know.
VYSHINSKY: But you should have investigated the case?
MANTSEV: The case was referred to the Revolutioriary Tribunal
479

Dn my instructions. The investigation of the case was not completed. Consequently, my gui It and crime consists in that the investigation of the case was discontinued and the case hushed up.
VYSHINSKY: This is precisely what I say. And you did this
after a conversation with Trotsky?
MANTSEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you did this on his instructions?
MANTSEV: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions to Mantsev.
BUKHARIN (to the Court): I have a question. Citizen Mantsev
declared here that the decision to murder Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov was made by the leading centre of the "Left Communists."
Since these were the words used, I have a right to ask Mantsev, who
were then the members of this centre of the "Left Communists 1 '?
Mantsev should know this, for he was secretary of the largest organization in Moscow.
MANTSEV: I have already declared in my testimony that the
Regional Bureau of the Communist Party was the centre of the
practical leadership of factional activities, and later of plotting
activities.
BUKHARIN: You speak of a decision of the centre, but are
such questions decided by an auxiliary bureau?
MANTSEV: This was the Regional Bureau of the Party, not
an auxiliary bureau. The leading group of this Regional Bureau
consisted entirely of "Left Communists,,. including yourself,
Yakovleva, Stukov and myself.
BUKHARIN: Was I a member?
MANTSEV: Yes, or in any case you closely participated in all
meetings where all questions were decided. The same is true of
Ossinsky. All of this took place in the room which was then occupied
by the Regional Bureau in a building on Soviet Square.
I must say that at a meeting of the "Left Communist" faction
during the Fourth Congress a bureau of the faction was elected,
which included you, Lomov, Radek, Ossinsky and Yakovleva.
But the fact of the matter is that this bureau of the faction was
engaged in working out theses to guide all the practical activities
of the "Left Communists." It was under the leadership of the
Moscow Regional Bureau of the Party. I do not remember whether
you were a member of it, but in any case you participated in the.
active leadership, you participated in this work just like Ossinsky,
who, while not a member of the bureau, participated in the work.
BUKHARIN: In view of the fact that Yakovleva relates all
these things to the period preceding the Brest-Litovsk Peace and
that during this time I was not even in Moscow and that the centre
of leading comrades of the "Left Communist" faction at that
time was in Petersburg-Mantsev will not deny it-the Moscow
480

bureau was not the central group, but only one of the central
groups. At that time I was also in the leading centre.
MANTSEV: Although you were in Petersburg, and Lomov,
Ossinsky and Yakovleva were also in Petersburg, I nevertheless
declare here that you, Ossinsky, Lomov and Yakovleva knew
about all the plans and practical steps of the Regional Bureau,
and, what is more, you not only knew but you sometimes sent a
number of decisions from Petersburg. Yakovleva does not deny
this here. There was a number of decisions which you sent from
Petersburg. They were carried out as decisions of the Regional
Bureau. Therefore, what you want to imply by sayi.ng that you
were in Petersburg, and therefore cannot bear responsibility, is
-··
wrong.
Then I also wish to note one circumstance, namely, that prior
to the Congress, prior to the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk
Peace, in February, Stukov openly stated that he was speaking
on your instructions and was expressing your principles. Later,
after the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace, you confirmed
this.
BUKHARIN: I ask whether prior to the Brest-Litovsk Peacef
the centre of the leading "Left Communists,, was in Petersburg.
But you try to picture the thing in such a way that the Regional
Bureau adopted decisions and I was informed, that is to say,
I directed, that is to say, I was aware of what the Moscow Regional
Bureau decided. I am not asking about this, what I am asking about
is who belonged to the leading group of "Left Communists" in
Petersburg. Reply to this question, and if you cannot reply, then do
not reply.
THE PRESIDENT (to Mantsev): But you have already replied
to this question?
MANTSEV: Yes, and I once more confirm that, notwithstanding
the fact that you were in Petersburg, your views were made known
to us, taken into consideration because you were the leader of the
faction, the leader of the "Left Communists," and there is no use
'trying to get away from it.
BUKHARIN: That is true. Permit me to say that there is some
big misunderstanding here. I do not deny my leadership ....
· VYSHINSKY: Were there cases in the practice of your work
at that time iri this group of "Left Communists" when you adopted
decisions independently as the leader?
·
BUKHARIN: No, there were not. Do you want to help me to put
the question which I am unable to formulate?
THE PRESIDENT: Nobody wants to help you, but Comrade
the Procurator is asking you a question.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you, were there cases when you
adopted decisions -independently?
31

481

BUKHARIN: There were no such cases.
VYSHINSKY: May I ask Ossinsky?
BUKHARIN: He will say that he was in the Ukraine.
VYSHINSKY: I ask perm1ss1on to put a question to witness
Ossinsky. (To Ossinsky.) Bukharin has already predetermined
your answer. Were there actually such cases?
OSSINSKY: Will you permit me to add something to this?
VYSHINSKY: On the rnb1ect?
OSSINSKY: On the sub1ect of the Moscow Regional Bureau
and independent decisions. There was a centre of the "Left
Communists." I caP roughly name its membership, if necessary.
VYSHINSKY: Please do.
OSSINSKY: In addition to myself, it consisted of Bukharin>
Yakovleva, Radek, Pyatakov, V. M. Smirnov and perhaps some
others. There was a centre of the "Left Commumsts," which met
in Leningrad at the penod when I was in Lenrngrad and then it
met in Moscow after the transfer to Moscow. On the other hand>
there was the Regional Bureau, the Moscow organization, which
consisted of a numher of leaders of the "Left Communists." Its
relation to the centre of the "Left Communists" was roughly the
same as that of the Moscow Party organization to the Central
Committee, that is, it was the biggest organization; and it even
had greater significance because, as a matter of fact, the Moscow
regional organization was the only one in which the "Left Communists" had a majority and any firm ground.
VYSHINSKY: At that time?
OSSINSKY: At that time.
VYSHINSKY: And in Leningrad?
OSSINSKY: In Leningrad they had no ground at all.
VYSHINSKY: That is, there were members of the centre there?
OSSINSKY: There were members of the centre there.
VYSHINSKY: And here?
OSSINSKY: Here there were the practical cadres.
VYSHINSKY: And the situation was that the relative importance of the Moscow group of "Left Commumsts" was enhanced?
OSSINSKY: Of course. Practically and politically, it was the
deci 01 ng centre.
VYSHINSKY: And it was only necessary to smash this Moscow
group of the organization of the "Left Communists" for its effects
to be felt all along the line?
OSSINSKY: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: And the centre would have ceased to exist?
OSSINSKY: Quite so. Now as regards the centre of the "Left
Communists" and its atti.tude to the question of the adoption
of this stand, I am unable to say whether the regional centre. discussed this question, because at that time I ...
482

BUKHARIN: You were in the Ukraine, of course.
OSSINSKY: I can prove by documents that in the latter part
of February I left for Kharkov and returned from there in the
early part of March.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): And what do you say?
BUKHARIN: What about?
VYSHINSKY: You just said something about Ossinsky's
evidence.
BUKHARIN: I want to say that Ossinsky was in the Ukraine.
VYSHINSKY: But he says he was in Moscow.
BUKHARIN. He said himself that he was in the Ukraine.
OSSINSKY: In the beginning of March I returned from the
Ukraine to Leningrad.
VYSHINSKY: Ossinsky says that in March 1918 he left the
Ukrarne and c<Jme to Leningrad.
OSSINSKY: I was in Leningrad.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): Then what are you talking about?
BUKHARIN: I am speaking of a different period, a more
interesting one from the point of view of the trial.
VYSHINSKY: Listen to what Ossinsky says and don't interrupt
hlm
.
OSSINSKY: I cannot recall that this centre of the "Left Communists" discussed this question in my absence. I am inclined
to think that it did not discuss this question, because my conversation with Bukharin, as I have had the honour to relate, shoVved that
Bukharin was undoubtedly undertaking action to extend the
bloc already without discussion in the centre, because he said to
·me: "Since you .ask me, and since you are a member of the
centre, I shall tell you; but this is a very secret matter and must
be known only to a I.imitep number of persons..•. ''
BUKHARIN: But assassination calls ·for so little secrecy
that it was qiscussed at a meeting?
.
·
MANTSEV: Assassination was secret to so little an extent that
it was discussed at a meeting at which four persons were present.
I do not know whether there was a fifth-B~kharin, but 'I remember
that there were four persons who had.the deciding voice 1n this
matter. Hence it seems perfectly clear to me from this that Bujcharin, of course, did undertake suoh independent actions;which he
arranged with and spoke about to certain persons at his selection
with a view to keeping it extremely secret.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): Was that;so?
BUKHARIN: It was not so, and could not have been so.
VYSHINS.KY: Yet Ossinsky asserts that there were occasions
when you decided certain questions independently and informed
certain members-0f yoµr centre at your·own·selection from motives
of. secrecy.

483

BUKHARIN: The times were such, Citizen Procurator, that
this would have been absolutely inconceivable.
THE PRESIDENT (to the Prosecutor): Have you any more
questions to ask the witnesses?
VYSHINSKY: No.
BUKHARIN: Permit me, I have some questions to put.
THE PRESIDENT: To whom?
BUKHARIN: To Mantsev and Ossinsky.
THE PRESIDENT: What question have you to put to Mantsev?
BUKHARIN: My question to Mantsev is as follows: as far as
I understood you, Citizen Mantsev, it foUows from your evidence
that the question of physical extermination was discussed at a meeting of the centre.
MANTSEV: This question was discussed at a meeting of the
Regional Bureau of the Party.
BUKHARIN: You said that this question was adopted upon a
decision of the centre?
MANTSEV: I say: at a meeting of the Regional .Bureau of the
Party, which was actually the centre, because the centre about
which Ossinsky spoke (he got the names somewhat mixed) did not
gt!ide the practical activities of the "Left Communists." Ossinsky
was nght here when he said that the cadres were actually in the
Moscow regional organization of the "Left Communists." For instance, the Urals maintained communication and received directions
from the Moscow Regional Bureau. Similarly, the Moscow Regional
Bureau was actually the centre of the activities of the "Left Communists"; and in this Moscow Regional Bureau-I do not know who
were the four persons Ossinsky referred to, but I think there were
five or six persons who knew about the proposals you made to them
and who discussed them. This is what I said.
BUKHARIN: Very well, I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Commandant, call the witness
Kamkov.
(Witness Kamkov enters the Court.)
THE PRESIDENT: Is your name Kamkov, Boris Davidovich?
KAMKOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Were you a member of the Central Committee of the party of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries
in 1918?
KAMKOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: You have been called as a witness in the
case of Bukharin, Nikolai Ivanovich. You are called upon to tell
the truth in answer to questions. Comrade Procurator, have you any
questions?
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, witness Kamkov, did you have occasion
in I91S to conduct negotiations with Bukharin with regard to the
484

mutual and joint actions of the group of "Left Communists"
and the group of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries?
KAMKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: To what end? What do you recall? What was
spoken about, what was proposed, what plans were made, and so
on? Tell us briefly.
KAMKOV: I recall the following. One day in the Smolny Institute, as I left my room to go to the conference ha II of the Presidium
of the Central Executive Committee, I think it was, I was overtaken
by Bukharin. There was somebody with him; I cannot recall who.
There was also a comrade with me, a "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary, I cannot recall now who he was either. Bukharin stopped me
and said roughly the following: the position in the Bolshevik Party,
as a result of the attitude towards the Brest-Litovsk Peace, is getting complicated and has assumed fairly acute forms. He said that
they were debating the question of the possibility of creating an
anti-Brest government consisting of "Left Communists" and "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries headed by ...
VYSHINSKY: Headed by?
KAMKOV: Here the name of Pyatakov wa:s mentioned as the
possible Chairman of this new government. Here too it was, I cannot
recall exactly in what connection, but I think that it was in answer
to my question how carrying this out was conceived, that the
phrase was pronounced which was later many times repeated after
Bukharin's statement in the press in 1924, when he first informed
the broad masses~ indeed everybody of it, the phrase about the
arrest of Lenin.
VYSHINSKY: Was it you who pronounced this phrase, or he?
KAMKOV: As to the question who pronounced this phrase,
I can say the follo\Ying, namely, that throughoutthe whole existence
of the party of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, right up to
its disappearance, the party has never attempted to shift responsi . .
bi lity on to anybody whatever for the events which developed in connection with the struggle against the Brest-Litovsk Peace. As to me
in particular, in the hard times I have gone throughJ I: have never
in the course of many years raised this question, although this conversation with Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin was fairly firmly graven on my memory. And so I did not make any attempt, which
might have been rather natural in the position in which I found
myself, to shift part of the responsibility for the events which developed in connection with the struggle against the Brest-Utovsk
Peace on to anybody whatever. On this basis I think there would
have been no sense in my depicting matters otherwise than I
did. The veryfactofourtalkwasfirstpublishedbyBukharin. And I
must say that even in 1924 I was extremely surprised when I read
of this whole story in the newspapers. What surprised me was not
485

the publication of this fact. Perhaps there were profound political
motives for this, and perhaps this fact was not a profound secret.
What surprised me was that the matter was put in the wrong perspective, that the question was put upside down,-that words which
had been pronounced by Bukharin were attributed to me.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, in answer to my question, who
put this question, Bukharin or you, you say that the question was
raised by Bukharin?
KAMKOV: In reply to this question I say that these words were
~renounced not by me but by Bukharin. As to the question, who is
telling the truth, inasmuch as our conversation took place twenty
years ago, I must say that not only was the matter actually so, as
I quite clearly recall, but it could not have been otherwise for the
following reasons: in order that I might make a proposal to a member
of the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party that a government
should be formed without Lemn, and that Lenin be arrested, I would
require some sort of authorization. On the other hand, I would have
to be firmly convinced that it would not become known the very
next day to the whole Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party,
which would involve a number of very unpleasant consequences
for us. Moreover, at that time-and I assert this categorically-we
had not even any thought of matters taking a turn involving the arrest of the chairman of the government and other members of the
government who held the same position as Lenin; we, and I in
particular, had no such thought. And so, basing myselfon the actual
state of affairs, which I definitely remember, basing myself on the
fact that nobody had authorized me to conduct such a conversation or to make such a proposal, I could not have acted independently before a member of the Central Committee of the Bolshevik
Party. And a third and final argument, also a fairly substantial one.
Even in 1924, when I read about this incident in the press, where my
name was mentioned and where the initiative was.attributed to me,
the fairly unpleasant initiative of arresting Lenin, I even then
could not understand from what motives the matter was depicted
in this way; whether it was purely an error of memory, or whether
some political ends were being pursued which I could not know at
the time because I was in exile in Chelyabinsk and was cut off
from political life and could not know the motives which guided
Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin when he depicted the matter in this
way. I at that time applied to the Chairman of the Chelyabinsk
Territorial Executive Committee, Paramonov, who also came w1 th
this newspaper and asked what it was all about. I said, and put it to
him, that I was surprised that the matter was being depicted in a
somewhat different way. There was such a talk between us, that is
a fact, as it was a fact that it had a political sigmficance; and it
was a fact it concerned the questions with regard to which I had ad-

486

dressed myself to the Chairman of the Territorial Executive Committee, thinking that indirectly I might help in some degree to correct
the mistake. Summtng up this part of my evidence, I must say that
I firmly hold to my position and am not mistaken that the proposal
to arrest Lenin was made by Bukharin. I do not of course answer
for individual words-it was twenty years ago. But I do answer for
the substance of the dialogue as it then took place, and I insist that
it was uttered by N. I. Bukharin and not by me.
VYSHINSKY: At that time you had contact with the "Left
Communists" in connection with the struggle against the Soviet
power?
KAMKOV: As regards contact with the "Left Communists"
at that period, I would hesitate to say categorically that there was
contact. What was there actually at that time? If you will permit me, I shall draw a conclusion so that it may be clear why it
happened as it did. The party of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries was formed and split off from the party of the Socialist-Revolutionaries in the fight against the party of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, chiefly on the question of war and peace. In th1s connection we regarded certain of the theses of the Zimmerwald Conference
as dogma which could under no circumstances be repudiated; it
seemed to us that this was treachery, not subjective but objective,
.and therefore there was no more sensitive question for the party of
the Socialist-Revolutionaries than the question of war and peace
.and the tactics of the socialist-revolutionary parties on this
·question. It is quite natural that when, quite unexpectedly to us,
from revolutionary strategic considerations, which, as it subsequently appeared, were .fairly correct....
VYSHINSKY: Fairly correct or absolutely correct?
KAMKOV: Absolutely correct-when Lenin proposed to condude a separate peace with Germany, a peace which he himself
called indecent-a peace with indemnities and annexations-this
seemed to us absolutely unacceptable.
VYSHINSKY: What measures did you adopt to frustrate this
p~~
.
KAMKOV: We bent every effort to make this peace impossible,
to frustrate its development in one degree or another. But being
.a party which had only just been formed and was still unconsolidated, we would have stopped there, we would not have gone so far,
if parallel with this there had not been something else which
extremely encouraged us.
VYSHINSKY: What encouraged you?
KAMKOV: This was the ex1stence of the group of "Left Communists," the anti-Brest sentiments within the Party.
VYSHINSKY: The anti-Brest and anti-Lenin sentiments
within the Party?
487

. KAMKOV: Well, in connection with this, we of course constantly sought some sort of contact with the "Left Communists.',
VYSHINSKY: You sought it and found it?
KAMKOV: I shall answer that presently. We sought contacts
with the purpose of a possible joint struggle against the BrestLitovsk Peace.
VYSHINSKY: Was agreement reached with the ·'Left Communists" about a struggle against the Soviet government, headed
by Vladimir Ily1ch Lenin?
KAMKOV: I know in this connection ..•
VYSHINSKY: Can you answer my question? Was an agreement
reached between the "Left Communists" and the" Left" SocialistRevolutionaries on certain conditions for a joint struggle against
the Soviet government, headed by V. I. Lenin?
KAMKOV: At what period?
VYSHINSKY: At this period, in the period following the
Brest-Litovsk Peace, or, if you like, the Brest-Litovsk period.
KAMKOV: You are referring to the period prior to the July
revolt?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, prior to the July revolt. Was there an
agreement or not?
KAMKOV: As far as I know there was such an agreement.
VYSHINSKY: Was there, or was there not?
KAMKOV: Inasmuch as I myself did not conclude ...
VYSHINSKY: But you were a member of the Central Committee
of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries; you should have known
whether there was an agreement or not.
KAMKOV: Such an agreement was reached.
VYSHINSKY: On what conditions? What was this agreement?
KAMKOV: I hesitate to give any details about this agreement,
but I can tell you of a conversation I had with Karelin.
VYSHINSKY: Why, was this a personal affair of Karelin's?
Are you not responsible for it as a leader of the Central Committee
of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries?
KAMKOV: I do not say tmt I am not responsible for it.
. VYSHINSKY: Was it an agreement of Karelin's or of your
Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries of the
time, in which you were one of the leaders, and which acted under
your guidance?
KAMKOV: I am not aware of any decision of the Central
Committee about such an agreement.
VYSHINSKY: You know that decisions are not taken on
everything. You had this conversation with Karelin while you
were a member of the Central Committee of the "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries?
KAMKOV: Yes, as a member of the Central Committee.
488

VYSHINSKY: You were aware of the matter?
KAMKOV: I was aware of the matter, I was kept informed~
VYSHINSKY: Do you hold yourself responsible for this agreement?
·
KAMKOV: As a member of the Central Committee, I am of
course responsible for the activities of the Central Committee,
,
although th is was veiled.
VYSHINSKY: The "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries gave both.
organizational and political assistance?
KAMKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: That was so?
KAMKOV: Yes, it was.
VYSHINSKY: And a second question. The Soviet government, headed byV. I. Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, was to have been
overthrown by the joint action of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and the "Left Communists" and a new government
formed consisting of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and "Left
Communists." Is that so or not?
KAMKOV: I hes~tate to say exactly.
VYSHINSKY: But the idea?
KAMKOV: The idea is roughly correct.
VYSHINSKY: Was not the revolt of the "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries in 1918 a development of this agreement?
KAMKOV: I hesitate to answer this categorically, whether
it was in the plan.
VYSHINSKY: But it was connected with this agreement?
KAMKOV: If we had been isolated generally, we, the "Left"·
Socialist-Revolutionaries, would not have gone so far.
VYSHINSKY: You embarked on a revolt relying ...
KAMKOV: On the anti-Brest sentiments in the country in:
general and the anti-Brest sentiments within the Party.
VYSHINSKY: On whose assistance did you rely?
KAMKOV: On the assistance of the "Left Communists.,,
VYSHINSKY: Did the "Left Communists" know that you.
were preparing to assassinate Mirbach and to organize tne July.revolt?
KAMKOV: I attempted to answer this question once ...
VYSHINSKY: I am askrng you a simple question and I request
you to give a simple answer. Yes or no?
KAMKOV: Unfortunately, I cannot answer yes or no to that
question.
VYSHINSKY: And how did you answer that question at the
pre Ii mi nary investigation?
KAMKOV: I hesitated to answer then too.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me to read Kamkov's testimony,
Vol. XLIV, p. 42 reverse, interrogation of Kamkov by the Pro-489

-curator of the U.S.S.R., last paragraph: "After this" (i.e., after
.an account of the agreement and conditions), "the 'Left' SocialistRevolutionaries organized the assassination of Mirbach and the
July revolt." ls that correct?
KAMKOV: It is.
VYSHINSKY: By the way, did you, as a member of the
·organization of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries take a direct
part in orgamzing the assassination of M1rbach?
KAMKOV: I did.
VYSHINSKY: "The 'Left Communists' were fully aware of
the preparations for the assassination of Mirbach and for the July
revolt." Do you confirm this?
KAMKOV: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently the "Left Communists" were
·informed about the July revolt?
KAMKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Fully?
KAMKOV: Fully, as I testified at the preliminary investigation in accordance with the information I had received from
Karelin.
VYSHINSKY: Yes, of course, in accordance with some information or other.
KAMKOV: That is what I wanted to say.
VYSHINSKY: And so it is quite clear. I ask you: was Bukharin
in particular, as ·a leader of the "Left Communists," aware of
the fact that the Socialist-Revolutionaries were preparing for
.a revolt, which then actually broke out in July 1918?
KAMKOV: According to what Karelin told me, he was aware
-Of it.
VYSHINSKY: He was aware of it? Fully?
KAMKOV: Most likely not partially, but fully.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
BUKHARIN (to the Court): I have a question. I should like
i:o ask Boris Kamkov whether he asserts that at the first meeting
in the Smolny I told him that even before my conversation with
him the question of the overthrow of the Soviet government, headed
by Lenin, was being debated in "Left Communist" circles.
.
KAMKOV: About the possibility of creating a government of
·"Left Communists" and "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries?
BUKHARIN: Yes, that this question was being debated.
KAMKOV: Yes.
BUKHARIN: That is enough for me.
VYSHINSKY: But not for me.
BUKHARIN: If you please.
VYSHINSKY: What does debating the question mean?
KAMKOV: In my opinion, debating means discussing.
490

VYSHINSKY: And the decision?
KAMKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: And your agreement, about which you spoke?
The agreement between the "Left" Sociahst-Revolutionaries and
the "Left Communists," of which Karelin told you?
KAMKOV: If Kare Ii n told me, it must have been so.
VYSHINSKY: An agreement about what?
KAMKOV: That the "Left Commumsts" would assist in
.overthrowing the government when we took action.
VYSHINSKY: That means that this was decided, since there
was an agreement?
KAMKOV: By whom?
VYSHINSKY: By you and the "Left Communists" jointly.
KAMKOV: I do not understand this question:. We decided
separately, we dld not make any joint decisions. We decided to
assassinate Mirbach and frustrate the Brest-L1tovsk Peace.
VYSHINSKY: That was decided?
KAMKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And then a revolt was projected? That was
decided?
KAMKOV: It was.
VYSHINSKY: And that is what you did?
KAMKOV: That is what we did.
VYSHINSKY: And so the question was not debated, but
<iecided?
BUKHARIN: But pardon me ...
VYSHINSKY: I request the accused Bukharin not to interfere
in my interrogation. I am restraining myself enough, and I request
my opponent to restrain himself. (To Kamkov.) I ask you, was there
a decision to overthrow the Soviet power?
KAMKOV: From such an aspect ..•
VYSHINSKY: There is only one aspect, to overthrow the
Soviet power?
KAMKOV: We had raised the question of frustrating the
Brest-L1tovsk Peace, assassinating Mirbach and attempting to
create an anti-Brest government by an armed struggle.
VYSHINSKY: Was this decided, or only debated?
KAMKOV: We decided it.
VYSHINSKY: Did you discuss or did you decide on the expe<iiency of concluding an agreement with the "Left Cornmumsts"?
KAMKOV: I have already replied. There were no such meetings
and discussions.
VYSHINSKY: That is not what I am asking-whether there
were meetings or not. What I am interested in knowing is whether
a decision had been taken by you, by the centre of the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries, in 1918, to wage your struggle against

491

the Soviet government together with the "Left Communists."'
Was there such a decision?
KAM.KOY: There was no such decision.
VYSHINSKY: But was there such an agreement?
KAMKOV: We had decided to wage a struggle against Ure
Brest government, to begin with the assassination of Mirbach,
and to carry the armed collision, which would follow as an inevitable consequence, to a conclusion, with the purpose of creating an
anti-Brest government. That was our firm decision.
VYSHINSKY: And in this operation of yours you counted
on the "Left Communists"?
KAMKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Why? Because you already had an agreement?
KAMKOV: Because there was an arrangement, according to
what Karelin told me.
VYSHINSKY: And so you did not merely debate joint action
between the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and "Left Communists," but reached an agreement. Do I understand you rightly?
KAMKOV: According to what Karelin told me, we regarded the
support of the "Left Commumsts" ...
VYSHINSKY: That is, you reached an agreement, about collaboration?
KAMKOV: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions. .
BUKHARIN: I want to put a question. During the confrontation
Kamkov stated that this question was not discussed by them at all
in the Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. (To Kamkov.) Do you confirm this? The question about an
agreement with the "Left Communists" for the purpose of overthrowing the Soviet government?
KAMKOV: I do not remember it.
BUKHARIN: Now I would like to ask ...
VYSHINSKY: Of whom did the Central Committee of the
"Left" Soctalist-Re:volutionaries consist at that time?
BUKHARIN: I have not finished my question, Citizen Procurator.
VYSHINSKY: But I am putting my question.
BUKHARIN: I stopped in the middle of a sentence ....
VYSHINSKY: You asked one question and got an answer.
·(To Kamkov.) I ask you of whom did the Central Committee
of the ''Left» Socialist-Revolutionaries consist at that time?
KAMKOV: Of Karelin, Spindonova, Mayorov, Proshyan,
1'rutovsky and myself. ·
VYSHINSKY: Is that all?
KAMKOV: I don't quite recall just now.
VYSHINSKY: Who was actually the leader of the Committee?
492

Who of these seven people played the most active and prominent
part?
KAMKOV: Spiridonova, I should say.
VYSHINSKY: Next?
KAMKOV: I, Karelin, Proshyan.
VYSHINSKY: A quartet, that is.
KAMKOV: The leading quartet.
VYSHINSKY: Maria Spiridonova, you, Karelin and Proshyan.
Regarding the assassination of Mirbach, was this question ded ded by the four of you?
KAMKOV: It was not decided in the Central Committee.
VYSHINSKY: Who decided the question regarding the July
revolt?
KAMKOV: We did not discuss it separately, but discussed
together tl.le question ...
VYSHINSKY: Who decided it?
KAMKOV: The Central Committee.
VYSHINSKY: "Although it was not discussed?"
KAMKOV: I say that it was not discussed separately.
VYSHINSKY: What do you mean by "not discussed separately"?
KAMKOV: Since it followed from the assassination of Mirbach,
it was part of the same discussion.
VYSHINSKY: Was there a resolution of the Central Committee
to raise a revolt? Was there such a resolution of the Central Committee?
KAMKOV: It was not recorded in our resolution, because there
was no such resolution.
VYSHINSKY: But there was a decision?
KAMKOV: Yes, there was a decisior.
VYSH INSKY: That is, there was no resolution, but there was
a decision.
KAMKOV: Either I do not understand you, or we are talking
~
.about different things.
VYSHINSKY: r understand you very well.
KAMK OV: But I do not understand you at all.
VYSHINSKY: Was there a resolution?
KAMKOV: No, there was not. We decided as follows: to assassinate Mirbach, and then the members of the Central Committee
were to make their way to the headquarter staff in the event
-Df an armed struggle, which was considered likely and perhaps
.even inevitable-to make their way to the headquarter staff on
Arsenievsky Street.
VYSHINSKY: To Popov's staff?
KAMKOV: Yes, .to Popov's staff.

493

VYSHINSKY: That was the decision?
KAMKOV: Yes, that was the decision.
VYSHINSKY: And what about the plans as to how to act, in
what direction, and so forth?
KAMKOV: That was not discussed by the Central Committee.
VYSHINSKY: No. Then what were they?
KAMKOV: They were reflections about this ...
VYSHINSKY: They were the reflections of Kamkov and Karelin? Or perhaps Spiridonova thought for all of you?
KAMKOV: I cannot tell you.
VYSHINSKY: Now I want to ask: you said at the preliminary
investigation that an agreement was re1che? with the "Left Con;rnunists." I have already read these two points. Who reached this
agreement?
KAMKOV: Karelin.
VYSHINSKY: On his own?
KAMKOV: He conducted the negotiations.
VYSHINSKY: On his own behalf?
KAMKOV: I do not think so; he was a member of the Central
Committee.
VYSHINSKY: On whose ·behalf, then?
KAMKOV: He should have conducted them on behalf of the
Central Committee, of course.
VYSHINSKY: On behalf of your party?
KAMKOV: It must have been on behalf of the party.
VYSHINSKY: Did it approve of these negotiations of his?
KAMKOV: I have already told you that he did not make a
report.
VYSHINSKY: But without a report-can you say anything?
KAMKOV: Undoubtedly.
VYSHINSKY: Am I entitled to draw the conclusion that the
agreement between the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
"Left Communists" about a joint strugg.le in the two cases of
which we have spoken here and about which I shall re?.d later was
reached by Karelin with the representatives of the "Left Communists" and was approved by the Central Committee of the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries?
.
KAMKOV: That conclusion. may be drawn, btlt as approval
does not signify resolution, it logically follows ...
VYSHINSKY: You understand the difference between a written resolution and the approval of the most active heads of a
given institution? Or must it be said that there was no agreement
between the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and the "Left
Communists," but that Karelin reached some sart of an agreement
on his own account? Can it be put that way?
494

KAMKOV: No, I think that would be wrong.
VYSH I NSKY: And so Karelin reached an agreement not on
his own account, but on somebody's behalf?
KAMKOV: On behalf of the party.
VYSHINSKY: That means that your party approved it?
KAMKOV: It approved it inasmuch as it did not disavow it.
VYSHINSKY: Right. Consequently, it may be said that the
party concluded an agreement?
KAMKOV: It may.
VYSHINSKY: Was it so?
KAMKOV: Since it may be said so, it means that it was so·.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
BUKHARIN: I have only one question. I would like to ask
Kamkov whether it was only from Karelin that he learnt that
I and my colleagues of the time in the faction of the "Left Communists" knew about the plan to assassinate the German Ambassador, Count Mirbach, and about this July revolt.
KAMKOV: Only from him.
BUKHARIN: And you did not learn this from Proshyan?
KAMKOV: I did not learn it from Proshyan.
BUKHARIN: You heard nothing about it from Spiridonova?'
KAMKOV: I heard nothing personally from Spiridonova.
BUKHARIN: You heard nothing?
KAMKOV: No.
BUKHARIN: You heard nothing about it from Trutovsky?
KAMKOV: I heard nothing about it from Trutovsky.
BUKHARIN: I have no more questions.
VYSHINSKY (to Kamkov): Tell us, please, did you haveoccasion to talk to Spiridonova about this'.?
KAMKOV: No.
.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have occasion to talk to Trutovsky
about it?
KAMKOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: And that is why you heard nothing?
KAMKOV: Yes.
.
VYSHINSKY: I have ho more questions. :
BUKHARIN: Then let me put one question. I meant to put
it this way: you did not hear about it because you did not talk
about it; but I ask you this: why did you not talk about such
an important question to such prominent colleagues of yours
in the leadership of your still young and still unformed party?
KAMKOV: You see, the position in our party was not yet
such that all questions were necessarily discussed, debated, a?-d
so on. There was still at that time a fairly anarchic state of affairs
in the Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
495

vYSHINSKY: As in the group of the "Left Communists"?
KAMKOV: And so it might have happened, let us say, that
Karelin conducted negotiations and did not inform the others.
But at that time in the given case it was a question of the revolt of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, a question of the
possible support of the anti-Brest elements (at least, that is how
I understand it). This question did not become the subject of
-discussion by our Central Committee.
VYSHINSKY: Permit me in this connection to put a question. Which'of you chiefly conducted the negotiations with the
~'Left Communists" about a bloc?
KAMKOV: Karelin; but I do not know exactly.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you know whether Karelin spoke
.about this to Proshyan or to Spiridonova?
KAMKOV: It is possible.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
BUKHARIN: Neither have I.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Commandant, call in witness
·Karel in.
(Witness Karelin enters the Court.)
THE PRESIDENT: Is your name Karelin?
KAREL IN: Karelin.
THE PRESIDENT: Your name and patronymic-Vladimir
Alexandrovich? ~ ~
KARELIN: Vladimir Alexandrovich.
THE PRESIDENT: You have been summoned as a witness
in the case of Nikolai I vanovich Bukharin. You must tell the
(:ourt nothing but the truth.
Comrade Procurator, have you any questions to put to witness Karelin?
VYSHINSKY: Yes. Witness Karelin, did you in 1918, while
a member of the Central Committee of the Party of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, have occasion to conduct negotiations with
Bukharin? Do you know Bukharin?
KAR ELIN: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Do you recognize him here?
KARELIN: Yes:
VYSHINSKY: Where is he sitting?
KARELIN: At the far end.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): And do you know Karelin?
BUKHARIN: I do. Why, we were confronted at your office.
VYSHINSKY: Had you seen him before the confrontation?
BUKHARIN: I knew him in 1918 and 1919.
VYSHINSKY: Is it the same Karelin who stands here as a
witness?
BUKHARIN: Well, he has changed so much that I would
496

not say that he is the same Karelin; but apparently this Karelin
is an evolution of the Karelin of that time.
VYSHINSKY: Everybody changes with age. But my question
is meant seriously.
BUKHARIN: I understand, Citizen Procurator, and it was
not my intention to make a witticism. I wanted to say that his
present content differs very much from what it used to be.
VYSHINSKY: I did not put this question without reason.
You see, Karelin has changed . . . .
BUKHARIN: But we had already met in your office.,
VYSHINSKY: And I ask you, do you really recognize Vladimir Alexandrovich Karelin, former member of the Central Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, in this witness? Do you
remember him?
BUKHARIN: It was difficult for me to recognize him in your
office, but after I had seen him in your office I recognized him
to be the same person, and I have no doubts about it.
VYSHINSKY: The question is an important one. It is no
matter for jesting. It is an important question.
BUKHARIN: I had no intention of joking when I said that.
VYSHINSKY~ Well, tell us, Citizen Karelin, did you in 1918,
while you were a member of the Central Committee of the Party
of "Left'' Socialist-Revolutionaries, conduct negotiations or meet
Bukharin in connection with his activities as leader of the group
of the so-called "Left Communists"?
KARELIN: Yes, I did. .
VYSHINSKY: Can you tell us where, when and in what connection you met Bukparin? And, secondly, what was the subject
of your conversations during these meetings?
KARELIN: In that case, perhaps you will permit me to deal
with the last months of 1917, November and December, because
the questions you have put seem to concern these negotiations.
VYSHINSKY: If you please.
KARELIN: I, as a member of the Central Committee of the
Party of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, met Bukharin for the
first time in the latter half of N9vember 1917. At that period the
Central Committee _ of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries
had to decide on its tactics in the immedjate future in view of the
fact that the question of the conclusion of peace had become very
acute. The Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries regarded the formation of the group of "Left Communists"
as an extremely important item in the prognosis which this party
made at that time. And in November, during the period directly
connected with the period when Bukharin came from Moscow to
Petrograd in order to report to a meeting of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee on the October uprising in Moscow,
32

497

I had a conversation with Bukharin regarding the position of the
group of "Left Communists," which at that time interested us
very much. We then elucidated-I say we, because several members of the Central Committee of the Party of "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries conducted these negotiations. . . .
VYSHINSKY: Who were "we"?
KARELIN: Kamkov, Proshyan and I. The Central Committee
had commissioned us to conduct such negotiations. In this conversation Bukharin adopted a quite definite position. I remember a
phrase he uttered to the effect that the group of "Left Communists"
-at that time it was organizationally identical with the Moscow Regional Bureau of the Communists-would take the actions
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party under its control. The implication was that the rupture of the peace negotiations would be ensured. It was just this question that interested
us "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. In December these negotiations were already sharply concentrated on the purely practical
question. This was just the time when the negotiations were being
conducted in Brest-Litovsk. We knew, particularly.from information which Proshyan gave us, that differences had become extremely acute within the Central Committee of the Communist Party.
We knew that Trotsky had advanced the formula: We neither conclude peace nor conduct war. And we realized that this formula
practically meant the rupture of negotiations, and consequently
the realization of what was the!J defined in the form of a slogan
as a revolutionary war, that is, rejection of the policy of-the
immediate conclusion of peace.
And when at the end of December or in the beginning of January
the question arose of sending a larger peace delegation to BrestLitovsk in order to bring about the rupture of negotiations-f was
one of the members of this delegation as a member of the government at the time-Natanson, who was also a member of the
Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, informed us that it had been definitely arranged with Bukharin
that this position would be carried out to the full, that it would
be carried out in. Brest-Litovsk; that the Brest-Litovsk neO'otiations would thereby be broken off and the result of this ~ould
be a revolutionary war. That was in December. Do you also
want to know about the January negotiations, because these
negotiations were continued?
VYSHINSKY; How did the bloc between the "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries and the "Left Communists" arise?
. KARELfN: It may be taken that this bloc was already formed
m December 1917. In January, the Central Committee of the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries displayed definite initiative
in negotiations which were being conducted not only with Bukharin,
498

but also with a number of other persons. Negotiations were
being conducted with Pyatakov and Radek, and on our side negotiations were being conducted by Natanson, Kamkov, Proshyan
and myself. All of us reported on these negotiations to the Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. It was
learnt from these negotiations that the position of the "Left Communists" at this period was an extremely trenchant one and that
they favoured a change of government. In the negotiations that were
conducted in February, the same idea was also stressed by the "Left
Communists" regarding the necessity of overthrowing the Soviet
government and replacing it by a new one: a coalition government
consisting of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and "Left Communists" was conceived. The position of Bukharin in these negotiations amounted to the fact that his group considered it necessary
to await the results of the Seventh Party Congress. The purpose
of this waiting position was that the "Left Communists,~·
as represented by Bukharin, reckoned tbat they would succeed in
gaining a majority at the Seventh Party Congress. In this way
action was postponed until the results of the Seventh Party Congress became known, although the position of Bukharin at that
period was a perfectly definite one, and in the information which
Proshyan gave at the meeting of the Central Committee of the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries it was said that Bukharin
favoured the overthrow of the Soviet government without shrinking
·even from the physical extermination of the leaders of the Soviet
government and of the Party.
VYSHINSKY: That is, without shrinking from the assassination of the leaders of the Party and the government?
KARELIN: Well, yes, from physical extermination, or assassination.
VYSH INS KY: Of whom exactly?
KARELIN: The leaders were spoken of, and Lenin, Stalin
and Sverdlov were mentioned personally.
VYSHINSKY: Who informed you of this?
KARELIN: Proshyan.
VYSHINSKY: And who had said this?
KARELIN: He cited· Bukharin.
VYSHINSKY: Did Proshyan conduct negotiations with Bukharin?
KARELIN: Yes, he did.
VYSHINSKY: On whose instructions?
KARELIN: On the instructions of the Central Committee of
the Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries.
.
VYSHINSKY: And did you personally speak to· Bukharin
about this?
KARELIN: Yes, we had a conversation on the subject. I am
32*

499

referring to a conversation that I had with Bukharin after a meeting of the All-Russian Central Executive Committee in April
1918. At this meeting Vladimir Ilyich Lenin had made his wellknown report on "The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government." At this meeting, on the instructions of the Central Committee of the Party of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, I made
a very trenchant speech, in which I concentrated attention on the
points which had been tactically agreed upon between the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries and the "Left Communists."
VYSHINSKY: That means that you acted against Lenin in
accordance with a preliminary agreement between the "Left Communists" and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries?
KARELIN: Yes, in accordance with a preliminary agreement
between the "Left Communists" and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, although not exactly in connection with this utterance. . . .
VYSHINSKY: But on fundamental questions?
KARELIN: Yes, on fundamental questions, which I accentuated ....
VYSHINSKY: Accentuated wherever it was necessary to
accentuate?
KARELIN: Yes, and where it followed from the bloc which
had been formed at that time.
VYSHINSKY: So there was a bloc?
KARELIN: There was. Of course, it was not represented by
any signed document, but it goes without saying that the understanding was a complete one.
VYSH INS KY: Who reached this understanding?
KARELIN: I do not quite understand the question.
VYSHINSKY: Who negotiated and reached an understanding
on the part of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, and with
whom on the part of the "Left Communists"?
KARELIN: I consider that those stages of the negotiations
which more and more precisely clarified the position which
I have related and which was sanctioned by the Central Committee
of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries were the actual achievement of this understanding. The "Left Communists" were represented by Bukharin, Pyatakov and Radek, and to some extent
by other persons; the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries were
represented by Kamkov, myself, Proshyan and partly by Natanson.
VYSHINSKY: Did Bukharin at this meeting tell you that
it was necessary to resort to the physical extermination of Lenin,
Stalin and Sverdlov?
KARELIN: He said that direct action would have to be taken,
without shrinking from physical extermination.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, was the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary
500

revolt carried out as a result of preliminary negotiations on the
subject with the "Left Communists"?
KARELIN: The "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary revolt that
took place at the beginning of July 1918 was due to the direct
initiative of the Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. It was considered that the relations of the bloc of
the "Left Communists" and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries had been definitely established, in particular, the definite
mutual information and agreement which existed on this question
between the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and the "Left
Communists.''
At the end of June 1918, when all the dispositions had been
made, and when at last a precise organizational plan had been
drawn up by the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary Central Committee, I had conversations with Bukharin, in the latter part
of June, in the First House of the Soviets.
VYSHINSKY: What about?
KARELIN: About the impending action.
. VYSHINSKY: You spoke about the impending revolt of the
"Left'' Socialist-Revolutionaries?
KARELIN: It was not said definitely in this case when this
action would take place; the date was not mentioned; but in this
conversation Bukharin referred to the negotiations which he was
co~ucting at this same period with Proshyan, and about which
Proshyan had reported to the Central Committee of the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries. In particular, one of the prime links
·in the organizational plan of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary
revolt was a terrorist act against the German Ambassador, Mirbach.
Proshyan said that in his conversation with Bukharin the latter
had said that this plan for the rupture of peace and this act of
assassination of Mirbach were in general impressive and effective.
VYSHINSKY: Bukharin said that the assassination of the
Ambassador ...
KAREL IN: That the terrorist act against the German Ambassador, Mirbach, would be an impressive and effective step towards
a rupture of the Brest-Litovsk Peace.
VYSHINSKY: Did the attempt made on the. life of V. L Lenin
by the Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist Kaplan on August 30~
1918, have any relation to the plans for the assassination of Lenin,
Stalin and Sverdlov?
KARELIN: Yes. One result of the July revolt of the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries was that the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries very rapidly proceeded to establish organizational contact
with the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries. The split had taken
place in October 1917, and during the period from October 1917
fo June 1918 the relations were rather strained and at times hostile
501

until the crushing of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary revolt
in 1918.
The fact that, as a result of the crushing of this revolt, the
majority of the party organizations and institutions went underground created a certain basis for joint activity and policy. In
addition, here again the premises arose for a bloc, and they
began to be realized immediately. And it was at this period that
Proshyan, who had charge of the combat organization of the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, in a report he made to the
Central Committee of the Party of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, referred to the fact that the insistence that Bukharin
had formerly displayed with regard to a terrorist act had become
extremely enhanced. And I must say that, although this has been
hidden and concealed for nearly twenty years, the Central Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries was definitely
posted on these events.
VYSHfNSKY: Posted on what?
KARELIN: On the fact that the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, through their combat organization, were preparing a terrorist
act against Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.
VYSHINSKY: That is, the Central Committee of the Party
of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries was posted on the preparations for the assassination of Comrade Lenin?
KARELIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And what had Bukharin to do with it?
KARELIN: According to Proshyan, who was conducting nego-.
tiations with Bukharin bearing an official character, Bukharin
urged that the terrorist act should be expedited. And so, when
the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries informed the Right SocialistRevolutionaries, gave them to understand that the Party of "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries was, as it were, ensuring political support for this act, from this moment it was fully realized that the
group of "Left Communists," having been smashed, had adopted
the standpoint of a direct fight and did not shrink from the most
determined methods, including terrorist acts.
VYSHINSKY: And so you confirm that the preparations of
the Right and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries for an attempt
upon the life of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin were made in conjunction
with Bukharin?
·
KARELIN: With the "Left Communists." We regarded
Bukharin as the leader of the "Left Communists."
VYSHINSKY: You said at the preliminary investigation that
the fact that you, in conjunction with the Right Socialist~Revo­
luti9naries and on the insistence of Bukharin, had attempted to
murder Lenin has been concealed from the Soviet people for twenty
years. Do you confirm this?
502

KARELIN: I confirm that there was insistence on the part
of Bukharin as the leader of the group of "Left Communists."
This insistence played a very big part in the perpetration of this
crime.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to put a question to
Ossinsky. Witness Ossinsky, tell us, please, what information
have you about Bukharin's implication in the attempt on the
life of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin in 1918?
OSSINSKY: I must first say the following. After the July
revolt of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries I left the "Left
Communists," and at the beginning of 1918 joined another group,
the Democratic Centralism group. My resignation from the group
of "Left Communists" was connected with my rejection of the
methods of struggle employed by the "Left Communists." Nevertheless, I continued my acquaintanceship with some of the
former "Left Communists," including Stukov.
At the end of 1918 I had a conversation with Stukov about
the state of Lenin's health after he was wounded by the terrorist
Kaplan. In this connection, Stukov said the following: "Do you
know that the shot fired by Kaplan was not only the result of the
directions given by the Central Committee of the Party of Right
Socialist-Revolutionaries, but also a direct result of the measures
which had been outlined by the bloc for the overthrow of the
government, and especially of the stand on the slaying of
ieaders of the government?" As at that time I did not consider
terrorism permissible as a method of struggle, I spoke very sharply
on this subject to Stukov, and this ended the conversation, so that
I did not ask him the details. So that I can therefore say nothing
about Bukharin personally; but this fact I can tell you.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, Stukov told you that the shot
fired by the Right Socialist-Revolutionary Kaplan at Lenin was
the result of the standpoint and the organizational measures which
had been drawn up, adopted and carried out, by whom?
OSSINSKY: By the bloc.
VYSHINSKY: Which bloc?
OSSINSKY: From the "Left Communists" to the Right
Socialist-Revolutionaries.
VYSHINSKY: And Bukharin acted in this as the leader of
the group of "Left Communists"?
OSSINSKY: Quite true.
VYSHINSKY: You were told this by Stukov.
(To Bukharin.) What do you say, accused Bukharin?
BUKHARIN: I say that it is all untrue.
VYSHINSKY: Did you hear the evidence regarding your
implication in the attempt to assassinate Vladimir Ilyich Lenin?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
503

VYSHlNSKY: What do you say to it?
BUKHARIN: I categorically deny all connection whatsoever.
VYSHINSKY: About the arrest, you admit?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: There was a plan to assassinate Vladimir Jlyich
Lenin?
BUKHARIN: I deny it.
VYSHINSKY: And you deny any definite relation to Kaplan's
crime?
BUKHARIN: Absolutely.
VYSHINSKY: Karelin implicates you.
KARELIN: Yes, I confirm it.
VYSHINSKY: Ossinsky spoke on the subject.
BUKHARIN: Ossinsky said that he could say nothing about me.
VYSHINSKY (to Karelin): Do you consider that Kaplan's
attempt was a measure to which the way was paved by the plan
to fight the Soviet government and to organize terrorist acts by
the "Left" and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and the "Left
Communists''?
KARELIN: Stukov told me that.
VYSHINSKY: This was co-ordinated with Bukharin's stand
on terrorism?
KARELIN: There was a stand that followed from this.
VYSHINSKY (to Bukharin): Moreover, Yakovleva testifies
that in 1918 you held the standpoint and planned the arrest .and
assassination of Comrades Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov. Karelin
testifies to the same, Ossinsky testifies to the same, and Mantsev
testifies to the same. I ask you, who gave you instructions to
arrange this crime; what intelligence service gave you these instructions?
BUKHARIN: I deny this fact altogether.
VYSHINSKY (to Karelin): I have no more questions. Be
seated.
BUKHARIN: I have a question to ask Karelin.
Firstly, I ask you to tell us, Citizen Karelin, whether you
confirm what you said at the confrontation, namely, that in the
early period prior to the Brest-Litovsk Peace the initiative of
the bloc belonged to the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, and
that in the second half, that is, after the Brest-Litovsk Peace, it
belonged to the "Left Communists."
KARELIN: I confirm that in the period prior to the rupture
of the negotiations in Brest-Litovsk on February 10, that is, when
it was still not clear how the talk of peace and the formula "Neither
peace nor war, n would end-at that period, as a matter of fact,
the initiative was the same on the part of both groups. In the
period following the rupture, the initiative belonged to the "Left"
504

Socialist-Revolutionaries, who proposed hastening this action~
whereas the "Left Communists," as represented by Bukharin.
considered that "there was no harm in trying," that it was better
to await the results of the Seventh Congress of the Bolshevik Party;
for at that time they believed that they would succeed in gaining
a majority at the Seventh Congress. After the Seventh Party
Congress and the Fourth Congress of Soviets, which already ratified the Brest-Litovsk Peace, the initiative belonged to the "Left
Communists. ''
,.,-BUKHARIN: At the c'onfrontation you said that during that
conversation, the first one, in the Smolny, which has been referred
to, it was the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries who spoke about
the possible arrest of Lenin. It is about this first conversation
that I am asking you.
KARELIN: The first conversation in the Smolny?
BUKHARIN: At that time you spoke in conjunction with
Kamkov, while on our side there were Pyatakov and I.
KARELIN: I did not say that.
BUKHARIN: At the confrontation you said that the proposal
regarding the arrest of Lenin at that time came from the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries, while later, in the period following
the Brest-Litovsk Peace, you mentioned that the "Left Communists" s.aid this.
·
KARELIN: Later, before the Seventh Congress, the proposal
to hasten action was made by the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, who displayed the initiative. That I confirm.
BUKHARIN: Permit me to put a second question. Does Citizen
Karelin know that during the Moscow revolt of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries one ·of the chief persons who took part
in the practical operations, from the standpoint of combative
technique, against the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries was the
"Left Communist" Bela Kun?
KARELIN: I knew that personally certain "Left Communists"-with regard to Bela Kun, I know that he was a "Left
Communist" at the time, a member of this group-took part in
crushing the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary revolt, and, in particular, that Bela· Kun led a detachment which fought near the
Telegraph Office, which had been seized by a "Left" SocialistRevolutionary detachment. But this was already at a time when
the failure of the revolt was clear. At that time we regarded itlas
abandoning the sinking ship.
BUKHARIN: Very well. Permit me to put another question.
Do you confirm here that Proshyan and other colleagues of yours
on the Central Committee reported at meetings of the Centra\
Committee on negotiations with the "Left Communists"?
505

KARELIN: I do.
BUKHARIN: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT (to Vyshinsky): Have you any questions
to put to witness Karelin?
VYSHINSKY: I have a question in connection with Bukharin's
questions. Was it the regular case that reports were made of all
meetings and decisions, that reports were made at the Central
Committee of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, or were there
also questions on which no reports were made?
KARELIN: Certain decisions of the Central Committee of the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries were sometimes adopted by
an inner circle of leaders. This was sometimes done by a canvas
of opinion, no special meetings being summoned. After all, the
Central Committee was a political group; especially in such a
situation as existed at that time, it was hardly possible at once
to draw up minutes, properly paragraphed, on every step and on
every decision.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions to put to Karelin.
I have a question to put to Bukharin: When did you arrive from
abroad?
BUKHARIN: In what sense?
VYSHINSKY: How in what sense? One can arrive in only
one sense.
BUKHARIN: I arrived from abroad-I think it was in April
1917.
VYSHINSKY: When did you begin to form the group of "Left
Communists''?
BUKHARIN: "Left Communists"? In 1918.
VYSHINSKY: And where were you in the months immediately
preceding the October Revolution?
BUKHARIN: In Moscow.
VYSHINSKY: And during the October Revolution?
BUKHARIN: Also in Moscow.
VYSHINSKY: And after the October Revolution?
BUKHARIN: After the October Revolution, on the instructions of the Moscow Bolsheviks, I left to make a report on the
progress of the uprising in Moscow, when we seized power
here. I made that report ....
VYSHINSKY: Did you begin to form the group of "Left Communists'' in Leningrad or in Moscow?
BUKHARIN: In Leningrad.
VYSHINSKY: Was it then, immediately?
BUKHARIN: No, not immediately. First, ,there was the
question of peace ....
506

VYSHINSKY: I understand; but this was a question of your
tactics.
BUKHARIN: No, not of tactics.
VYSHINSKY: And was there a group of followers with you?
BUKHARIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: Did you reckon on coming to power by peaceful
means alone, or with a group?
BUKHARIN: At that time this question had not yet been
raised, but_ the differences began over the question of peace.
VYSH IN SKY: I am not asking you about the differences;
I am asking you when, at what time you began to form the group
of "Left Communists."
BUKHARIN: I think that it was towards 1918.
VYSHINSKY: At the beginning of 1918?
BUKHARIN: I do not remember in what month, Citizen
Procurator. It was over twenty years ago.
VYSHINSKY: At any rate, when you started negotiations
with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries you did have this
grotip?
BUKHARIN: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you had already formed your
group organizationally, and then you entered into a bloc with
the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries; or was this interwoven?
BUKHARIN: No, we already had a group, although I would
not say that it was already fully formed. Excuse me, Citizen
Procurator, but you are putting the question in a very personal
way. This trend arose . . .
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking when this trend arose, I am
asking when .this group was organized.
BUKHARIN: I told you, at the beginning of 1918.
VYSHINSKY: I request you to be more precise: did you start
negotiations with the group of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries
after your group had been organized?
BUKHARIN: I think that it was when it had been already
formed in the main.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, were your sentiments at that time very
intensely opposed to the Brest-Litovsk Peace and the leadership?
BUKHARIN: Sentiments were rather intense.
VYSHINSKY: Rather intense?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: So that, given such sentiments, the idea of
arrest did not arise by chance?
BUKHARIN: No, you see, I would not put it that way.
507

VYSHINSKY: Why, it is perfectly clear that in an intense
and heated atmosphere ...
BUKHARIN: But I want to say that before the Brest-Litovsk
Peace ...
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking that ....
BUKHARIN: Before the Brest-Litovsk Peace this idea, in an
affirmative way, had not occurred either to me or to others.
VYSHINSKY: And after the Brest-Litovsk Peace?
BUKHARIN: After the Brest-Litovsk Peace it arose.
VYSHINSKY: That is what I am asking. Were your feelings
profoundly rancourous?
BUKHARIN: It was not a question of personal rancour
against persons and against leaders.
VYSHINSKY: I ask, was the atmosphere heated enough?
BUKHARIN: Yes, heat along the line of the factional struggle
was very great.
VYSHINSKY: The atmosphere was intensely heated?
BUKHARIN: Yes, intensely.
VYSHINSKY: And in such an atmosphere, the idea of arrest.
and in the case of some, perhaps, of assassination, was not precluded?
BUKHARIN: As regards arrest, I admit it; as regards assassination, I know nothing whatever.
VYSHIN'SKY: But the atmosphere was ...
BUKHARIN: The atmosphere was the atmosphere.
VYSHINSKY: The atmosphere was appropriate for such ideas.
and plans to arise in certain heated minds?
BUKHARIN: Perhaps they did arise in somebody's mind, but
I personally saw no symptoms of it.
VYSHINSKY: And nobody urged you in this direction?
BUKHARIN: No, nobody.
VYSHINSKY: Nobody suggested that Lenin, Stalin and
Sverdlov must be removed?
BUKHARIN: No, Citizen Procurator, nobody.·
VYSHJNSKY: No special organs?
BUKHARIN: Neither organs nor persons.
VYSHINSKY: No special organs gave you instructions?
BUKHARIN: No, they did not.
VYSHINSKY: And you entirely deny this evidence of the
witnesses?
BUKHARIN: No, I do not deny it entirely.
VYSHINSKY: But in respect to this?
BUKHARIN: In respect to this I deny it entirely.
VYSHINSKY: But why do both former "Left Communists'~
and "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries say so-everybody?
508

BUKHARIN: No, not everybody: of two "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries, only one said it.
VYSH INSKY: They say that you, as a traitor to the revolution, were preparing to arrest Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov.
BUKHARIN: That I admit.
VYSHINSKY: And they added that you were also preparing
to assassinate them.
BUKHARIN: With this addition I absolutely do not agree;
I categorically deny it.
THE PRESIDENT: No more questions?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: I think the witnesses may leave the Court
room.
VYSHINSKY: I still have to make a statement about the
expert witnesses.
THE PRESIDENT: Allow me to adjourn the Court for ten
minutes. Adjournment for ten minutes.

* * *
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming.
Please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please, be seated.
The session is resumed. In order to establish a number of
circumstances connected with the killing of Alexei Maximovich
Gorky, Valerian Vladimirovich Kuibyshev, Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky and Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov, and also to elucidate a number of circumstances connected with the attempt to
poison Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhov, the Military Col1egium of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R., at the request of the Procurator
of the U.S.S.R., has summoned a commission of experts, consisting of Prof. Nikolai Adolphovich Shereshevsky, Scientist of
Merit, Prof. Dmitry Alexandrovich Burm in, Scientist of Merit,
Prof. Vladimir Nikitich Vinogradov, Prof. Dmitry Mikhailovich
Rossisky, and Vladimir Dmitrievich Zipalov, Doctor of Medicine.
~The experts summoned are present in the Court room. Prof. N. A.
Shereshevsky, Prof. D. A. Burm in, Prof. V. N. Vinogradov,
Prof. D. M. Rossisky, and Dr. V. D. Zipalov.
(The experts summoned take their seats.)
VYSHINSKY: The questions the prosecution has to put to
the expert witnesses are as follows.
On the first section-the killing of A. M. Gorky.
First question: Was it permissible to appoint a regimen of long
walks after dinner, especially when accompanied by exhausting
work, for a patient who suffered from acute pneumo-sclerosis,
broncho-ectasiae and cavities in the lungs, pulmonary emphysema
509

and deterioration of the cardio-vascular system, and who was
subject to severe periodic haemorrhage?
Second question: Might such a regimen, practised over a long
period, cause the deterioration of the health of the patient and
especially of the cardio-vascular system?
Third question: Was it permissible to place such a patient in
an apartment where there were known to be persons suffering from
.
?
,grippe.
Fourth question: Was the care of the patient correct, and were
the case history and the treatment of A. M. Gorky properly
conducted during his last illness, which lasted from May 31 to
June 18, 1936?
Fifth question: Is it permissible in general for prolonged,
large doses of heart stimulants, namely, digitalis, digalen
(extracts of foxglove), strophanthin and strophanthus, to be
administered intravenously, subcutaneously and internally at
the same· time, and, in particular, in the case of the very sick
patient A. M. Gorky, who was sixty-eight years of age, and
suffered from the above-mentioned affection of the internal organs?
Sixth question: What may have been the consequences of such
treatment of A. M. Gorky during his last illness?
Seventh question: Can it be granted that properly qualified
physicians could have adopted such a wrong method of treatment
without malicious intent?
Eighth question: May it be regarded as established, on the
basis of the sum total of these facts, that the method of treatment of A. M. Gorky was a deliberate act of wrecking designed to
hasten his death, the expert knowledge possessed by the accused
Levin and Pletnev having been utilized for the attainment of
this criminal end?
On 'the second section-the killing of Comrade Kuibyshev.
First question: Was it permissible to prescribe prolonged administrations of large doses of digitalis (foxglove) to the patient
V. V. Kuibyshev, who suffered from attacks of angina pectoris
and advanced arterio-sclerosis?
Second question: Might the administration of large doses of
extracts of foxglove over a long period (several months) have
contributed to increasing the frequency of the attacks of anginp
pectoris?
Third question: Is it permissiMe in case of attacks of angina
pectoris to allow the patient to move about and to climb stairs,
and may a patient suffering from an attack of angina pectoris be
left without immediate medical attention?
Fourth question: May it be regarded as established, on the
basis of the sum total of these facts, that the method of treatment
of V. V. Kuibyshev was a deliberate act of wrecking desigI;led
510

to hasten his death, the expert knowledge possessed by the
accused, as well as the fact that V. V. Kuibyshev was deliberately
left without medical attention during one of his usual attacks of
angina pectoris, being utilized for this purpose?
On the killing of Comrade Menzhinsky.
First question: Was the prolonged administration of extracts
of foxglove, especially in conjunction with lysates, which tend
to enhance the action of foxglove extracts, permissible in the case.
of the patient V. R. Menzhinsky, who suffered from arteriosclerosis, accompanied by severe attacks of angina pectoris and
infarctions of the myocardium?
Second question: Might such a method of treatment have ~on­
tributed to the exhaustion of the cardiac muscles and thus have
contributed to a fatal issue?
Third question: May it be regarded as established, on the basis
of the sum total of these facts, that the accused L. G. Levin and
I. N. Kazakov deliberately adopted wrecking methods of treating
Comrade Menzhinsky, making it their criminal aim to bring about
the earliest onset of death, which did in fact result from their
criminal actions?
On the killing of Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov.
First question: In the case of M. A. Peshkov, who suffered
from croupous pneumonia as described in the testimony of the
accused Levin, was the treatment conducted properly?
· Second question: Might this wrong method of treatment, employed by the accused Levin, have contributed to a fatal issue
of the sickness?
Third question: May it be regarded as established that the
accused Levin, having set himself the criminal aim of hastening
the ·death of M. A. Peshkov, deliberately adopted a wrecking
method of treatment for the accomplishment of his criminal aim?
Finally, the questions to the expert witnesses on the subject
of the attempt to poison Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhov.
First question: May it be concluded from the materials submitted to the experts regarding the· organization of the poisoning of
Comrade N. I. Yezhov that the accused G. G. Yagoda and
P. P. Bulanov employed for the attainment of their criminal ·aim
extremely dangerous and highly potent means for the gradual
poisoning of Comrade N. I. Yezhov?
Second question: May it be regarded as established that as a
result of the methods employed by the accused G. G. Yagoda and
P. P. Bulanov to poison Comrade N. I. Yezhov, his health was
considerably impaired and that if the crime had not been discovered
in time there was a direct menace to the life of Comrade
N. I. Y ezhov?
511

Permit me to hand one copy of these questions to the expert

witnesses.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
(The Procurator hands a list of the questions to the expert
witnesses.)
THE PRESIDENT: Have the defence any additional questions
to submit to the commission of experts?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: Duringtheadjournment the Counsel for Defence acquainted themselves with the
questions. They consider them to be exhaustive, and have no
additions to make.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the accused any additional questions to submit to the expert witnesses?
THE ACCUSED: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: I must explain that the expert witnesses
may remain in the Court room, that they may examine all the
materials of the case, and as a result of their labours they must
submit their findings to the Court strictly in accordance with the
circumstances of the case and based on the specialized knowledge
the experts possess.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to make a request to the Court. I
request that it be explained to the expert witnesses that their
findings should also be based on the explam.tions which will be
given to the Court by the accused in this case and by the witness
Belostotsky, and I therefore consider it essential that the expert
witnesses should be present in the Court during this time.
THE PRESIDENT: That is what I had in mind. If the experts
are present in Court during the interrogation of Levin, Pletnev
and Kazakov, they will thus acquaint themselves with their
testimony.
Adjournment until' 11 a.m. on March 8.
[Signed]

PREsmENT:

V. "ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of tke U .S.S.R..
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER
Military Jurist First Rank

512

MORNING SESSION, MARCH 8, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming~
please rise.
.
.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
We shall pass on to the interrogation of the accused Levin.
Accused Levin, do you confirm the testimony given during
the preliminary investigation?
LEVIN: I do.
· THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any questions?
VYSHINSKY: I have a few questions.
Accused Levin, tell us when and under what circumstances
you became acquainted with Yagoda, and what were the results
of your intimacy with Yagoda.
LEVIN: My acquaintance with Yagoda began as early as the
beginning of the twenties. I treated the late Dzerzhinsky and
Menzhinsky. I met Yagoda occasionally and gave him medical
treatment. Our meetings became more frequent approximately
since 1928 in connection with A. M. Gorky's arrival in Moscow.
It is a well known fact that since his youth A. M. Gorky had
been sick with tuberculosis in a very severe form. Both before the
revolution and since 1921, after the revolution, 'he 'had lived in
Italy for a number of years. During these years Gorky became
very homesick for the Soviet Union, he was very depressed by his
being extremely out of touch with the Union, by the impossibility of
getting news regularly. He began to talk more and more often about
the necessity of returning. He could not return for good on account
of the state of his health, and he therefore decided to come to the
Union periodically. Since i928 he used to come to Moscow for the
summer months, when the climatic conditioI)s around Moscow
are relatively favourable for lung and heart patients, while in
Italy, on the contrary, it becomes too hot. Since that year he used
to come to us for the summer months and return to Italy for the
winter.
There was an established rule that he was to be under the observation of some of the Soviet physicians while in Italy. Since I
was considered his constant physician, I was entrusted with the
selection of a group of physicians and professors who would divide
33

513

this half-year into three two-month periods, so that each stayed
with him for two months in Italy without losing touch with his
steady work here. I and a few Leningrad and Moscow physicians
were among this group. Each time I left Italy with him, came
to Moscow with him and left Moscow with him as his constant
physician. The others did it in turns.
During his residence in Moscow I, as A. M. Gorky's constant
physician, visited him very frequently. He lived outside Moscow.
I would stay with him at his place for the night even when there
was no urgent need.
At the same time Yagoda was also a frequent visitor to the
house. We met there frequently. The relations established between
us were not the casual relations between physician and patient,
but those of acquaintances.
During the same period my visits to Yagoda at his home or at
his country house became more frequent, because approximately,
I think, around 1930 his wife, Averbach, ailed frequently. She
was chronically ill and suffered frequent relapses in the nature of
her illness. During these acute periods of her illness it
happened that I would sometimes have to be in their house either
alone or with one of the physicians of the Medical Service of the
O.G.P.U., even with the late surgeon .Rozanov, who was
closely connected with the case as a physician. Thus our acquaintance became more and more intimate.
I must say that Yagoda treated me very nicely, and showed
me various marks of attention. Frankly speaking, it did not
seem to me as being something out of the ordinary, because we
physicians very often meet with the desire on the part of patients
to show their gratitude and give us marks of their attention. In -a
word, I did not see anything wrong or incomprehensible in this
for me. These marks of attention on his part flattered me.
VYSHINSKY: How was this attention expressed?
LEVIN: Well, for instance, he had beautiful flowers, he had
a conservatory, and he would send me flowers, he would send me
very good French wine. Once he made me a present which was
very valuable to me: he turned over to me as my property a country
house near Moscow where I lived with my family during the summer months for five or six years.
VYSHINSKY: Did he specially build the country house for
you?
LEVIN: No, he turned it over to me as my property. . . .
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, he made you a present of a country house.
LEVIN: Yes, I regarded it as a present.
VYSHINSKY: Did Yagoda give you any assistance during
514

your trips abroad by relieving you of various customs house formalities?
LEVIN: Yes, he would inform the customs house that when
returning from abroad I was to be allowed to pass without undergoing inspection.
VYSHINSKY: What use did you make of this?
LEVIN: I would bring things for my wife, for the wives of
my sons, children's things, women's things-I would bring
small presents to people at my place of work.
VYSHINSKY: In a word, you brought anything you wanted,
without paying customs duties, without undergoing customs
house inspection.
LEVIN: Yes, but these were not valuables.
VYSHINSKY: Of course, you did not sell these valuables.
t..EVIN: I brought them for relatives.
VYSHINSKY: I understand, for yourself, for relatives, for
friends, for acquaintances, for pals.
LEVIN: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: The border and customs house regulations did
not apply to you.
LEVIN: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: And did this go on for long?
LE-VIN: In 1934 I still made a visit abroad.
VYSHINSKY: And when did this "special" attention to you
begEJvIN: Since my first trip to Alexei Maximovich-'--in 1928
or 1929-up to the last.
VYSH INSKY: Well, what further? Did you consider these as
being ordinary marks of attention? Is that the way patients generally show attention to their physicians?
LEVIN: You probably know that it is not so.
VYSHINSKY: Neither trips abroad, nor presents, nor country
houses, nor customs house, nor duties?
LEVIN: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: So did you consider this as something ordinary?
LEVIN: For him it was probably ordinary.
VYSHINSKY: And for you?
LEVIN: For me, of course, it was not ordinary.
VYSHINSKY: Did you give thought to the question why
this was happening, what the cause was for this attention?
LEVIN: I gave no thought to this, because I considered th~t
for him this was of no great consequeRce, that for a man of his
position these were small marks of attention.
VYSHINSKY: But you compare it with your own position;
was it an ordinary thing for you?
33•

515

LEVIN: Of course it was not an ordinary thing. But neither
was he an ordinary patient.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, an extraordinary patient showed
you extraordinary attention.
LEVIN: Yes, of course.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, please, what was the upshot of all
this?
LEVIN: For an ordinary patient it is difficultto make presents,
because . . .
VYSHINSKY: I beg your pardon, I shall interrupt you again.
When you were relieved of all kinds of customs house inspections,
did you think that that was natural and legal?
LEVIN: I did not think it natural and legal, but I knew that
it was quite frequently practised.
VYSHINSKY: Practised by whom, and how did you know?
LEVIN: I knew that a number of persons enjoyed the privileges of diplomatic passports, etc.
VYSHINSKY: So you considered yourself a diplomat.
LEVIN: No, of course not, I did not consider myself that.
VYSHINSKY: You realized that you were taking advantage
of gross violations of Soviet laws but you agreed to this lawlessness
for mercenary reasons.
LEVIN: Yes, I realized that. But I must say that the state
suffered very small losses on account of this; I brought just a few
neckties, trifles.
VYSHINSKY: But numerous individual losses make up one big
loss. However, this is the way every criminal justifies his crime.
Even when one steals a million in gold he can say that, with
regard to a powerful and rich state like ours, this is a small loss for
the state.
LEVIN: Permit me to continue your thought and figure out
in money how much the customs house was supposed to levy. The
sum would be a small one.
VYSHINSKY: You still do not realize the gravity of your
crime.
LEVIN: Yes, yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: Then proceed with your explanations.
LEVIN: I must confess that this was such attention that it
even flattered me. This was attention on the part of the head of
a body like the 0.G.P.U. I saw in this a definite recognition
and confidence in me on the part of the head of such an institution. The things I know now could never have entered my head.
VYSHINSKY: But later they did enter your head.
LEVIN: Yes, they did.
VYSHINSKY: How did it happen?
LEVIN: In 1932 Alexei Maximovich decided to move to MosI

•

516

cow for good with' all his family. The family included his son,
Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov. Early in 1933, in the winter, during
one of my visits to Yagoda, during a walk through the grounds
of his country house, he began a conversation to which he subsequently returned several times, a conversation about Alexei
Maximovich 's son, about Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov. He said
that he was dissatisfied with his mode of life, with his behaviour;
that he was dissatisfied with the fact that he never touched any
work, that he was never engaged in anything; he was dissatisfied
with the fact that he was addicted to strong liquors. But this was
a conversation which rriore or less corresponded to the fact that by
that time M. A. Peshkov, who was the father of two children, had
no constant duties whatever, no obligatory work, no definite
occupation, and merely lived at his father's home. So these
conversations so far aroused no grave suspicions whatever.
During one such conversation he said to me: You see, Maxthat was the way he called him-is not only a good-for-nothing,
but also exerts harmful influence on his father. His father loves
him, and he takes advantage of it to bring undesirable and harmful people to Alexei Maximovich 's house. He must be removed.
It is necessary to do something that he should perish.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say?
LEVIN: To bring about his death.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, to murder him?
LEVIN: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: And so Yagoda proposed to you to carry this
out.
LEVIN: He said: "You must help us in this." I do not
have to convey the psychological reaction, how terrible it was
for me to hear this. I think that this is sufficiently understood.
And then the ceaseless mental anguish. Six years separate me from
this period; therefore I cannot vouch for a verbatim presentation
of this story, only for its substance. He said further: "You are
aware who is talking to y9u, the head of what institution is
talking to you. You know," he said, "that I am responsible
for the policies of the Party and for the lives of the most
important leaders of the Party and the government, and also
for the life and activities of Alexei Maximovich, and therefore,
since it is necessary for the interests of Alexei Maximovich that
his son be put out of the way, you must not hesitate before this
sacrifice. ''
VYSHINSKY: Those were his arguments?
LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What did you think?
LEVIN: I thought nothing. He said: "Let us now drop this
517

conversation; you think it over at home, and I shall call you in
a few days.''
VYSHINSKY: What were you supposed to think over?
LEVIN: Whether to agree or not to agree.
VYSHINSKY: Besides this, what else were you supposed to
think over?
LEVIN: How to put this into effect. He said: "Have in
mind that you cannot help obeying me, you cannot get away
from me. Once I place confidence in you with regard to this
thing, once confidence is placed in you with regard to this
matter, you must appreciate it and you must carry this out.
You cannot tell anybody about it. Nobody will believe you.
They will believe not you, but me. Have no doubts about this,
but go ahead and do it. You think it over, how you could do
it, whose services you could enlist for this. I will call you in
a few days.'' He reiterated that my refusal to carry this out
would spell ruin for me and my family. I figured that I had no
other way out, that I had to submit to him. Again, if you look
at it retrospectively, if you look back at 1932 from today, when
you consider how all-powerful Yagoda appeared to me, a nonParty person, then, of course, it was very difficult to evade his
threats, his orders.
VYSHINSKY: And did you try to evade them?
LEVIN: I tried in my soul.
VYSHINSKY: In your soul, but you showed no resistance?
LEVIN: No.
VYSH IN SKY: Did you try to protest, to tell somebody about
this, to inform?
LEVIN: No. I did nothing, I did not try to evade, I spoke
to no one and adopted a decision. When I came to a decision, I
called on him. Yagoda said to me: "It will probably be difficult
for you to do this alone. Whom do you think you could enlist
for this affair?" I told him that it was generally very difficult
to introduce a new physician to Alexei Maximovich 's house, because
they did not like it there. There was, however, one physician
who had treated Maxim Alexeyevich during one of my vacations;
this was Dr. A. I. Vinogradov from the Medical Service of the
O.G.P.U. Kryuchkov knew him very well. If I am not mistaken,
it had been Kryuchkov who had sent for Vinogradov. (Kryuchkov
was Alexei Maximovich's secretary.) I said that it would be absolutely necessary to enlist his services. I said further that, if it
were necessary to enlist the services of someone else of the consulting physicians, then the only consulting physician who used to
come to this house was Professor Dmitry Dmitrievich Pletnev.
I did not point him out definitely at the time, but I said that if
518

it should become necessary in case of -such an illness to have a
.consulting physician present, the only one who could come there
was D. D. Pletnev. That was the way things stood in 1933. He was
urging me.
VYSHINSKY: Who is "he"?
LEVIN: Yagoda. At that time he thought of another design.
During our meetings, Yagoda often inquired of me about the state
of health of Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky, the then chairman of the O.G.P.U., who was seriously ill at the time. Yagoda
was Assistant Chairman of the 0.G.P.U. I must say that Menzhinsky had been my steady patient from the very first years of
-the Revolution. In 1926, he had had a very serious attack of angina pectoris. From that time on his health failed, he had begun to
be ill. I, as generally any other therapeutist, could do very little
to help him in this state, and, as always happens in such cases,
people began to search for wonder-working cures. At that time
there was much talk of a miraculous medicine, the one of Professor
Schwartzman-myole, which he advertised as a salutary cure
for angina pectoris. Schwartzman was invited to come from Odessa
and for some time he produced a good impression on Menzhinsky.
Then came disappointment in Schwartzman. Then there was another sensation, there was a lot of publicity about Ignaty Nikolayevich Kazakov, and he (Menzhinsky) turned to Kazakov.
Beginning with 1932, Vyacheslav Rudolfovich was regularly
treated by Kazakov. He was not only his steady patient, but also
helped to spread his fame, and he was one of the small group of
important people at that time who were under the impression that
they were being helped by him a great deal. This publicity around
Kazakov, the constant discussions about him in Moscow, resulted
in a special meeting of the Council of People's Commissars being
.called to discuss the question of medical treatment by Kazakov's
methods, a meeting at which Menzhinsky was present, and at
which he supported Kazakov's fame.
VYSHINSKY: Meetings which took place in government institutions have no bearing on the present question.
LEVIN: I am referring to a meeting at which the question
-0f Kazakov's lysates was discussed.
VYSHINSK.Y: Tell us, what did Yagoda say to you concretely
.about Menzhinsky?
LEVIN: To this question I immediately replied to Yagoda ...
VYSHINSKY: Which question?
LEVIN: Several times he just inquired about Menzhinsky's
"State of health, and in October or November he again asked me:
~'How is Menzhinsky's health?" I said that, according to my information, he was in a very bad state. Then he said: "Why drag
it out, then? He is a doomed man." He was indeed regarded at
519

that time as an almost hopeless patient from the point of view
of restoring his capacity to work.
VYSHlNSKY: Did you tell Yagoda that Menzhinsky could
keep up the fight for his life for an indefinite period?
LEVIN: I beg your pardon, I did not get your question.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you: when Yagoda asked you about
Menzhinsky's state of health, did you not tell Yagoda that Menzhinsky could keep up the fight for an indefinite period of time?
LEVIN: Yes, of course.
VYSHINSKY: And what did Yagoda say in reply to this?
LEVIN: What he said was: "I have information that he is
a living corpse.''
VYSHINSKY: And did he not say differently-"What for?n
LEVIN: He did.
VYSHINSKY: Did he not say that it was necessary to hasten
this?
LEVIN: Yes, he did. That is what I am coming to. I told him
then about the fact that since 1932 he had been a zealous supporter
of Dr. Kazakov, and that if it was a question of . . .
VYSHINSKY: Speak out frankly, don't be embarrassed.
LEVIN: T am speaking frankly.
VYSH TNSKY: Did not Yagoda tell you it was necessary to
kill Menzhinsky?
LEVIN: He did.
VYSHINSKY: And whom did you say then it was necessary
to enlist for this purpose?
LEVIN: Dr. Kazakov.
VYSHINSKY: You asked Dr. Kazakov to come, for what
purpose? For treatment or for bringing about death?
LEVIN: For the latter.
VYSHlNSKY: Why exactly Kazakov?
LEVIN: He treated patients with lysates, and Kazakov prepared the lysates himself in his laboratory.
VYSHINSKY: So he could prepare anything he liked?
LEVIN: He could prepare lysates which would not help, but
would bring harm.
VYSHINSKY: That is the same as administering poison.
LEVIN: Quite right. I told Yagoda then: "Inasmuch as in
the course of the treatment there are interruptions, pauses, and
during these interruptions I visit Vyacheslav Rudolf ovich Menzhinsky, I could combine the lysates with some cardiac medicine
which in combination with lysates might prove harmful."
VYSHINSKY: Did you explain this to Yagoda?
LEVIN: Yes, I explained it to Yagoda.
VYSHINSKY: And what did Yagoda say?
520

LEVIN: He said that he would talk it over with Kazakov
and that he would give him instructions. When I met Kazakov
at the end of 1933, I found out that Yagoda had sent for him totalk it over with him, that he knew what was to be done, and
that he would discuss with me as to how the lysates were to be
prepared. He asked me what cardiac medicines I would recommend during my visit.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Kazakov, do you confirm Levin's.
present evidence?
KAZAKOV: In sttbstance I do.
VYSHINSKY: Do you confirm that Levin spoke to you?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What exactly did he tell you?
KAZAKOV: I met Levin three times and he gradually drew
me into this thing: there was a meeting in May, in June, and,.
finally, in October.
VYSHINSKY: What year?
KAZAKOV: 1933.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, there were three meetings in 1933?'
KAZAKOV: Three meetings.
VYSHINSKY: The first meeting was in May; what did you
talk about then?
KAZAKOV: At this meeting he expressed his sympathy over
the fact that I was isolated from medical circles, that physicians
attacked me, and that I was in such a difficult situation. Hesuggested that I keep in closer touch with physicians, and he also
said: "I 'II have a special talk with you." I asked: "What about?''"
He said: "About Menzhinsky's health."
VYSHINSKY: He recommended that you keep in closer
touch with any particular physician, or with physicians in general?
KAZAKOV: I kept at a distance, because a very ruthless fight
was going on.
VYSHINSKY: And did Levin express sympathy for you?
KAZAKOV: During the meeting in May he said that I was
fussing about with Menzhinsky to no purpose. Menzhinsky, he
said, was a living corpse. In my opinion, Menzhinsky was developing chronic-sepsis. Levin disagreed with me, and as a result
I was dropped. I told him in sharp. terms that· I was dissatisfied
with the way he had behaved towards me. He told me: "We shall
talk this question over with you specially." It is true that his
cynical remark that Menzhinsky was a corpse and that there was
no use fussing with him jarred upon me.
VYSHINSKY: Why did it jar upon you?
KAZAKOV: Because it was cynical. I knew that when Vyacheslav Rudolfovich took treatments from me he was back on
his feet.
521

VYSHINSKY: In a word, his statement sounded cynical to
you.
KAZAKOV: Of course, cynical. As soon as he would show improvement, I would be kept away from him.
VYSHlNSKY: Who would keep you away from him?
KAZAKOV: Levin. I came around again on March 5 and then
I was kept away until June. I told him that.
VYSHINSKY: What did he answer?
KAZAKOV: He? As usual, with a smirk ....
VYSHINSKY: Further.
KAZAKOV: I met him in June. He expressed the opm1on
that I had been right in my diagnosis about Menzhinsky's having
developed chronio-sepsis as a result of the grippe. There was a group
-0f physicians there and they did not object to my starting to treat
him.
VYSHINSKY: You are making it very long. After all, we
will interrogate you separately. At present, tell us briefly-what
was the second conversation about?
KAZAKOV: He said that he did not object to my starting
to treat Menzhinsky ....
VYSHINSKY: In a word, he called you?
KAZAKOV: Yes. I started to treat Menzhinsky.
VYSHINSKY: And were you not surprised at this?
KAZAKOV: He uttered only one phrase: "l think you have
understood me."
VYSHINSKY: And did you understand him?
KAZAKOV: I understood nothing.
VYSHINSKY: In cases when one does not understand when
one is told, "You understood me," one usually asks: "What are
you driving at?" Did you ask him?
KAZAKOV: I had a great negativism....
VYSHINSKY: And how would it be in Russian?
KAZAKOV: An unfriendly feeling for Lev Grigorievich.
VYSHINSKY: The more reason why you should have asked
what this equivocation meant.
KAZAKOV: I should have, but I didn't.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you really did understand him?
KAZAKOV: No, no.
VYSHINSKY: So he said to you: "You understood me?"
And what did you answer?
KAZAKOV: I just stared at him with bulging eyes and said
nothing. I started to treat Menzhinsky, and Menzhinsky got
better.
·
VYSHINSKY: You tell us less about your merits and more
about the substance of the question put to you. Why did you
not ask him: ''What are you driving at? I do not understand you.''

522

Usually people do' not ask when they understand. Isn't that
so?
KAZAKOV: Yes, that's so.
VYSHINSKY: Did you guess something at that time?
KAZAKOV: No, at that moment I did not guess. Later, in
October, he told me: "l thought you were cleverer; you still have
not understood me.''
VYSHINSKY: How was your cleverness supposed to have
been displayed?
KAZAKOV: He told me very curtly: "l 'm surprised that you
have undertaken Menzhinsky 's treatment with so much zeal and
that you are even improving his health; you should not have allowed
him to get back to work." And then he said this phrase: "By
this you are irritating Yagoda.''
VYSHINSKY: And what did you say?
KAZAKOV: And he added that this would lead to no good.
VYSHINSKY: And what did you say?
KAZAKOV: I listened on, waiting for what was coming next.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you listen? Wasn't it already clear
what he was driving at?
KAZAKOV: I wanted to hear what was corning next.
VYSHINSKY: And what did come next?
KAZAKOV: In October Levin said to me: "You must realize
that Menzhinsky is actually a corpse and by restoring his health,
by allowing him to get back to work, you are antagonizing Yagoda. Remember that Yagoda is interested in getting Menzhinsky
QUt of the way, and if you do not submit Yagoda will make short
shrift of you. ''
VYSHINSKY: He was frightening you.
KAZAKOV: Yes. "Not a word of this to Menzhinsky, because
you will not escape Yagoda anyhow. Yagoda is a man who does not
stop at anything. He would get you even if you were underground."
VYSHINSKY: That i.6 how he was frightening you?
KAZAKOV: He stated it in these terms.
VYSHINSKY: Were you frightened?
KAZAKOV: It gave me food for thought. Levin further said
to me: "Remember that Yagoda will talk to you about this."
Honestly speaking, I was entirely bewildered, frightened and did
not know what to undertake.
VYSHINSKY: What did you answer Levin?
KAZAKOV: I answered nothing.
VYSHINSKY: So it appears that all these three times you
answered nothing, you kept silent?
KAZAKOV: I did not know what to answer to these cynical
talks. Perhaps Levin was Yagoda's agent, because he had no
grounds whatever for speaking to me so frankly.
523

VYSHINSKY: Hence, you assert that Levin was frightening
you, that he was threatening you?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Levin, is it true what Kazakov is
saying here?
LEVIN: I do not know whether to object at once, right away,
or later. There is so much confusion here ....
VYSHINSKY: That is what the Court investigation is forto untangle all this confusion.
LEVIN: I do not know what he means by such expressions as
"frightening," "bulging eyes," and his reference to the fact that he
understood me by the expression of my eyes alone. I did not consider Kazakov so clever that he could understand at a glance.
I think it is not worth while dwelling on these trifles. Of
course, if the Court demands it, I can tell everything in detail.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you, did you really try to frighten
Kazakov?
LEVIN: It is fantastic, if only for the reason that my whole
conversation with Yagoda concerning Menzhinsky took place in
the autumn of 1933, and here it appears that I was supposed to
know in May that it was necessary to kill Menzhinsky. Kazakov says that the conversation took place in May.
KAZAKOV: The first conversation took place in May.
VYSHINSKY: Did he try to frighten you during the first
conversation?
KAZAKOV: No. The second conversation took place in June.
VYSHJNSKY: Did he try to frighten you?
KAZAKOV: No, he did not.
VYSHINSKY: And when did he?
KAZAKOV: In October, when I returned from Kislovodsk, he
spoke to me frankly.
LEVIN: Yes, I told Kazakov then that Yagoda said so-and-so,.
that he would call for him and tell him•all the details.
VYSHINSKY (to Kazakov): Did Levin tell you that?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Levin, you deny that you were trying
to frighten Kazakov?
LEVIN: I said that, inasmuch as I was frightened by Yagoda ...•
VYSHINSKY: You were frightened yourself?
.
LEVIN: I said that I had no means of fighting him.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Kazakov, is Levin telling the truth?
KAZAKOV: Levin uttered one phrase to the effect that Yagoda
was a man who would not stop at anything and that, if f offered
resistance, he would certainly deprive me of my life.
LEVfN: That is perfectly true.
VYSHINSKY: Did you say that?
524

LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And, consequently, what?
LEVIN: If you want, I can tell you about the conversations
in May and June.
VYSHINSKY: No.
LEVIN: I also think it is not worth while.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently?
LEVIN: Since Yagoda would not stop at anything ....
VYSHINSKY: It was necessary to submit?
LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you say so?
LEVIN: Yes, and we so decided.
KAZAKOV: I decided nothing.
VYSHINSKY: Did Levin tell you that Yagoda would send for
you?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What did you say in reply?
KAZAKOV: I said nothing.
VYSHINSKY: What did your conversation end with?
KAZAKOV: We got talking ....
VYSHINSKY: Did you come to an agreement?
KAZAKOV: No, I told him nothing.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Levin, did Kazakov say anything to
you?
LEVIN: Before his meeting with Yagoda, he said nothing.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, your task was to inform Kazakov
of his coming meeting with Yagoda, to .have a conversation of
a criminal character?
·
LEVIN: Yes, I told Kazakov that Yagoda would send for
him and tell him all.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, did you instruct Levin to
tell Kazakov that he would be asked to come and have a talk 'with
you?
YAGO DA: The first time I saw this man was here.
VYSHINSKY: So you gave no such instructions to Levin?
YAGODA: I gave instructions to Levin to talk it over ....
VYSHINSKY: With whom?
YAGO DA: With Kazakov; butI did not receive him personally.
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you whether you received him
or not; I am asking you whether you instructed Levin to talk
it over with Kazakov.
YAGO DA: I gave no instructions to talk to Kazakov.
VYSHINSKY: You just said here that you gave Levin such
instructions.
YAGO DA: I gave Levin instructions to bring about the death
of Alexei Maximovich Gorky and Kuibyshev, and that's all.

525

VYSHINSKY: And how about Menzhinsky?
YAGODA: I did not bring about the death of either Menzhinsky
or'Max Peshkov.
VYSHINSKY: We shall discuss this when we interrogate
you. What is important for me now is to verify whether Levin
is stating the truth when he says that you commissioned him fo
tell Kazakov that you would send for him.
YAGO DA: I gave no commission to Levin about talking to
Kazakov.
VYSHINSKY: You did not?
YAGODA: No.
VYSHINSKY: Levin, did you hear Yagoda 's statement?
LEVfN: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Who is right, then?
LEVIN: I do not know how to take this present statement
by Yagoda. The fact that Kazakov was asked to come to Yago day
Kazakov himself . . .
VYSHINSKY: I'm not asking about this. Did Yagoda give
you a commission?
LEVf N: He did.
VYSHINSKY: Did you convey it to Kazakov?
LEVIN: I did.
VYSHTNSKY: Was Kazakov sent for?
LEVIN: He was.
VYSHINSKY: How do you know that he went?
LEVIN: He says so himself.
VYSHINSKY: How do you know that he went?
LEVIN: Kazakov himself told me about it.
VYSHINSKY: Kazakov, were you called to see Yagoda?
KAZAKOV: Yes, on November 6, 1933, at three o'clock in
the afternoon.
VYSHINSKY: Did you go?
KAZAKOV: Yes, a car was sent for me.
VYSHINSKY: Did Yagoda receive you?
KAZAKOV: He did.
VYSHTNSKY: Did he talk to you?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Had you ever seen Yagoda before that?
KAZAKOV: No, that was the first time.
VYSHINSKY: And what did Yagoda speak to you about?
KAZAKOV: I must make a short introductory statement first.
Why did I go on November 6? On November 5 in the evening, Menzhinsky was taken from Shestie Gorki to Moscow, to Second Meshchanskya Street, to a redecorated house. I had not seen Menzhinsky
before this for about two or three weeks. On November 6, a car
526

of the O.G.P.U. came for me and I went to Meshchanskaya StreeL
When I came into the rooms in which Menzhinsky and his family had been installed the evening before, I found there, first
of all, a terribly stifl!ng atmosphere....
VYSHINSKY: Do not go into such details, please, we will
interrogate you separately. Tell us what we are interested in in
connection with Yagoda 's statement that he never saw you before.
KAZAKOV: On November 6, when I returned home from
Menzhinsky's, I was called to the telephone and was told that
a car would come for me from Yagoda. In this car I was driven
to the first entrance of the O.G.P.U.
Yagoda met me and asked: "How do you find Menzhinsky's
health?" I said that after the attacks of bronchial asthma, Menzhinsky's condition was now grave. Further, he asked me whether
I had spoken to Levin. I said: "Yes, I have spoken." "What
are you fiddling about, then?" Yagoda said. "Why don't you
act?" I had given medical treatment to Menzhinsky, he had been
in such a grave condition. Together with the chauffeur, I had even
carried him on to the veranda, because he had been undergoing
an attack as a result of the stifling atmosphere in the rooms. "Who
asked you to offer medical assistance to Menzhinsky?" Yagoda
was literally fuming; he said: "Everybody has given up Menzhinsky~
you are fussing about with him to no purpose. His life is of no use
to anybody, he is in everybody's way. I order you to work out
together with Levin a method of treatment whereby it would
be possible to bring about a quick end to Menzhinsky's life. Remember that if you make any attempt to disobey me, I shall find
quick means of exterminating you.''
VYSHINSKY: What did you answer him?
KAZAKOV: Yagoda went on to say: "I know how to appreciate
people who submit to me. You cannot hide from me. n I asked
what he wanted of me. He reiterated that I must meet Levin and
work out a method which would help to hasten Menzhinsky's
death. I was utterly perplexed. Out of fear, I submitted. I said
that I would see Levin. I met him at the end of December.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, Kazakov states that you summoned him, that you met him, and that you gave him definite
instructions. What have you to say about the matter?
YAGODA: It says in Kazakov's testimony that he came to
see me, that he was there in the evening.
VYSHINSKY: You answer my question: did you summon
Kazakov, and did you meet him?
YAGODA: The first time I saw this man was here. I never spoke
to him on these subjects.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you speak about this otherwise during
the preliminary investigation?
527

YAGO DA: It is not true that I said this at the preliminary
investigation.
VYSHINSKY: I request that Vol. II, p. 195, of the record
be presented.
Deposition of the accused Yagoda of D"ecember 28, 1937 (p. 196
-0f the record):
"It is a known fact that during his last years Menzhinsky
was more often ill than at work. I directed the work. It was clear
that after his death I would become Chairman of the O.G.P.U. I
became accustomed to this idea and was waiting for Menzhinsky's
-death, but he did not die. When I instructed Levin to get Max out
of the way . . . "
VYSHINSKY: Accused Levin, who is this Max?
LEVIN: Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov.
VYSHINSKY: "l thought, why could not the same thing be
<lone to Menzhinsky? In one of my conversations with Levin,
I spoke to him bluntly about this. He was already linked with me
in preparing crimes and he could not refuse to do this."
Accused Yagoda, was Levin linked with you in preparing
crimes?
YAGO DA: Not in the case of Max.
VYSHINSKY: In whose case?
YAGO DA: Kuibyshev and Maxim Gorky.
VYSHINSKY: And did you state that during the preliminary
investigation?
YAGODA: I did.
VYSHINSKY: "But he said that he had no access to Menzhinsky, that the physician in attendance was Kazakov, without
whom nothing could be done. I instructed Levin to enlist Kazakov for this purpose.''
Did you depose this, accused Yagoda?
YAGO DA: I said that I did, but it is not true.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you make this deposition if it is not
true?
YAGODA: I don't know why.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated.
"I summoned Kazakov and confirmed my orders. . . . He did
bis work. Menzhinsky died.''
Did you depose this, accused Yagoda?
YAGODA: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Hence, you met Kazakov?
YAGODA: No.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you make a false deposition?
YAGODA: Permit me not to answer this question.
VYSHINSKY: So you deny that you organized the murder of
Menzhinsky?
528

YAGODA: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Did you admit it in this deposition?
YAGODA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: When the Procurator of the Union interrogated
you, what did you answer to this question about your part in the
tnurder of Menzhinsky?
YAGODA: I confirtned it also then.
VYSHINSKY: You confirmed it. Why did you confirm it?
YAGODA: Permit tne not to answer this question.
VYSHINSKY: Then answer my last question: Did you file
any protest or complaint with regard to the preliminary investigation?
YAGODA: None.
VYSHINSKY: Are you filing any now?
YAGODA: No.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated.
Accused Levin, proceed.
LEVIN: I omitted one detail which should be mentioned.
Yagoda told me that he had had a conversation with Kryuchkov.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Kryuchkov, what kind of conversation
did you have with Yagoda?
'
KRYUCHKOV: Yagoda told me that it was necessary to
remove Maxim Peshkov.
VYSHINSKY: What does "remove" mean?
KRYUCHKOV: To murder Maxim. He said: "It is not a question of Maxim, but mainly of Gorky. Gorky's activity must be
cut down, Gorky's activity is in the way of some people." From
the further conversation, I understood that he was referring
to Rykov, Bukharin and others. During this conversation I learnt
from Yagoda that a counter-revolutionary coup was being planned
and he was a participant in this coup. He told me plainly: Soon
there will be a new government in the U.S.S.R., a new government more in line with your tendencies.
VYSHINSKY: Whose?
KRYUCHKOV: Mine.
VYSHINSKY: And what were your tendencies?
KRYUCHKOV: On the basis of a conversation I had with him,
approximately in 1933, he could draw the conclusion that I was
close to the organization of the Rights. I asked him what I was
to do. He said: "You know how Alexei Maximovich loves Max.
Max's death would be a heavy blow to Gorky and would turn him
into a harmless old man. You must kill Max." At the same time
he added a few threatening phrases. I complied with Yagoda's
proposal. Yagoda told me: "You used to drink with Max before,
so now ply him with liquor .... "
34

529

VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, did you speak t-0 Kryuchkov
about the conspiracy?
YAGODA: No. I never spoke to Kryuchkov about the conspiracy.
VYSHINSKY: Did you talk to him on political topics?
YAGO DA: No, I never trusted him. ·
VYSHINSKY: So everything that Kryuchkov says ...
YAGODA: It is all lies ..
VYSHINSKY: You gave him no such instructions regarding
Maxim Peshkov?
YAGODA: I have stated, Citizen Procurator, that with regard
to Maxim Peshkov I gave no instructions. I see no sense in his
murder.
VYSHINSKY: So Levin is lying.
YAGO DA: He is lying.
VYSHINSKY: Kazakov is lying?
YAGO DA: Yes, lying.
VYSHINSKY: Kryuchkov?
YAGODA: Is lying.
VYSHINSKY: You gave Kryuchkov no instructions regarding
the death of Maxim Peshkov? At the preliminary investigation
you ...
YAGO DA: I lied.
VYSHINSKY: And now?
YAGODA: I am telling the truth.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you lie at the preliminary investigation?
YAGODA: I told you. Permit me not to reply to this question.
VYSHINSKY: Continue, accused Levin.
LEVIN: As a result of our joint wrecking actions Vyacheslav
Rudolfovich Menzhinsky and Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov died
in May almost on the same day, on- two succeeding days. I beg
leave of the Court and of you, Citizen Procurator, not to dwell for
the moment on the details of how we effected this and to say a
few more words on my further conversation with Yagoda regarding
our next victims. I wish to choose this sequence in order to
make it more comprehensible to you as laymen what we did along
the· wrecking lines. It will be necessary for me to give a brief,
very ·brief medical introduction; then our mode of action, which
was identical in all four cases, will be clearer to you. Therefore
I shall now dwell only on the fact that as a result of our
joint wrecking activities Menzhinsky died on May 10, 1934,
ahd' Maxim Alexeyevich Pesh~~~ died the following day.
530

These crimes were perpetrated. There is no need to stress how
vile and abominable they were when committed by any doctor,
no matter who the patient is or what the circumstances may be.
But it was especially painful for me to carry this out with regard
to Menzhinsky, for whom r always had a very strong liking ...
VYSHINSKY: So we see.
LEVIN: ... and who was always very well disposed towards
me, and especially with regard to the son of Alexei Maximovich
Gorky.
But at that time I was unaware of what the future had in
store for me. Within a few days after the funerals of V. R. Menzhinsky and M. A. Peshkov,- Yagoda again summoned me and said:
"Well, now that you have committed these crimes, you are entirely in my hands and you must agree to what I shall now proposesomething much more serious and important. I warn you that
what I shall instruct you to· do now is just as obligatory for you
as my previous instructions. But in order to make you understand
what I am going to tell you and what you have to do, I must briefly inform you of the situation in the country. After this matters will become more clear to you, a non-Party man who stands
far from politics, and you will then know better how to act."
Then he went on to tell me that widespread dissatisfaction was
growing and strengthening in the Party against the Party leadership, that a change of government was inevitable, predetermined
and unavoidable, that the movement was headed by Rykov, Bukharin and Yenukidze. And since this was inevitable, since it would
happen all the same, then the sooner it took place, the better.
In order- to speed it up, in order to facilitate this process,
we had to remove certain members of the Political Bureau and
Alexei Maximovich Gorky Jrom the political scene . .This was a
historical necessity. But you stopped me, Citizen Procurator, when
I wanted t-0 tell you what I lived through in connection with this.
r shall, therefore, not speak of this at all, I shall only relate the
bare facts in accordance with your wish. Then, after a while,
he said: "There is no reason for you to be so upset, you should
understand that this is inevitable, that this is a historical moment, that it is a historical necessity, a stage of the revolution
through which we must pass, and you will pass through it with
us, you will be witness of it, and you must help us with the means
which you have at your disposal. Instead of becoming upset, tell
me whom you can take upon yourself besides Alexei Maximovich
Gorky.'' I again omit the rest and will only say that I had no
further conversations with him on that day. Within a few days,
I again visited Yagoda and told him that I was comp~lled to fulfil
these instructions of his as well. In the course of this conversation}
Yagoda added: "Alexei Maximovich is a man who is very close
34*

531

to the highest Party leadership, a man v~ry much devoted to the
policy which is now being carried out in the country, very devoted personally to Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin, a man who will
never betray, who will never tread our road. Then again, you
know what authority Gorky's words have both in our country
and far beyond its borders, you are aware of the influence he
enjoys and of how much harm he can cause our movement by his
words. You must agree to undertake this," he said, "and you
will reap the fruits of it when the new government comes to
power.''
When Yagoda asked me whom else I could propose, I told him
that this could be carried out in the case of a person who ails often
and frequently requires medical aid; I pointed to Valerian
Vladimirovich Kuibyshev, member of the Political Bureau.
I could enlist Dmitry Dmitrievich Pletnev, who knew Valerian
Vladimirovich. Both of us had known him for about twelve years.
Pletnev, like myself, knew him; we had both known him for
about twelve years as our patient. I also said that in Moscow
medical circles it was known to all that Dmitry Drnitrievich
Pletnev harboured anti-Soviet sentiments and that he would agree
to this more readily than anyone else. Yagoda said: "Very well,
I shall speak to him myself. You warn Pletnev that I shall
invite him and speak to him. Besides, in everything concerning
Alexei Maximovich, Kryuchkov can help, and with regard
to Valerian Vladirnirovich, his secretary, Maximov, will be in
the know."
VYSHINSKY: That means you organized the death of A. M.
Gorky?
LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Whom did you draw into this criminal deed?
LEVIN: Professor Pletnev.
VYSHfNSKY: Who were your accomplices in this deed?
LEVIN: Pyotr Petrovich Kryuchkov.
VYSHINSKY: Upon whose orders did you act?
LEVIN: Yagoda's.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Permit me to question the accused
Yagoda.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, do you confirm this part of
the accused Levin ,s testimony?
YAGODA: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: You gave such an order?
YAGODA: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY (to Levin): On whose instructions did you also
organize the assassination of Valerian Vladimirovich Kuibyshev?
LEVIN: On Yagoda 's instructions.

532

VYSHINSKY: Drawing into this criminal deed ...
LEVIN: Maximov and Professor Pletnev.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Kryuchkov, do you confirm what Levin
says?
KRYUCHKOV: I confirm that Yagoda gave me instructions to
murder A. M. Gorky.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Maximov-Dikovsky, do you confirm
Levin's testimony?
MAXIMOV-DIKOVSKY: I confirm it, but I was recruited not
by Levin, but by Yenukidze and Yagoda.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Pletnev, do you confirm the testimony
of Levin, who referred to your participation in this crime?
PLETNEV: Yes, I confirm it.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated. I have no questions for the time
being.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Levin, continue.
LEVIN: I would ask permission to make a short digression
for purely medical explanations in order to make it clear how
we acted.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
LEVIN: In order to contract an infectious disease, let us say
diphtheria, it is not absolutely essential to have bacilli of diphtheria in one's mouth, or, .say, to contract croupous pneumonia, it is not absolutely essential that the respiratory organs
should contain pneumococci. These bacilli may remain in the
organism for some time without causing harm; they are not
virulent. But a time comes when they become virulent. In order
to bring about this moment, it is necessary to bring the organism
to a state in which it loses its resistance, loses its defensive
force and becomes susceptible to some infection. In order to contract, let us say, pneumonia, or any acute disease, a simple cold
is sometimes sufficient. I am firmly convinced of this despite the
fact that there are physicians who think that a cold is no real
ailment. But I think it beyond doubt that if we were to open
the windows here on both sides, many of those present would
not be here tomorrow. In order to weaken an organism's resistance, one must know the weak spots of the organism, know the
points of lowest resistance in the organism, know which organs are more susceptible to irritation and which are easier to weaken. Finally, one should not think that a person can be poisoned
only by a poison. It is necessary to know that each medicine
in its essence contains poison; everything depends upon the dose;
any medicine, even the commonest, applied in an unsuitable
dose and at an unsuitable moment, can be made to serve as a poison. I shall cite only one practical example. It is generally known
that people suffering from diabetes take insulin for cure. Insulin
533

is injected twice a day by the patient himself, people carry it
about in their pockets and inject very large doses of 80 to 100
units. However, if you inject a small dose, 5 or IO units, to
a person whose organism cannot take insulin, a person whose
blood has :a reduced sugar content, he will probably die of
so-called hypoglycenique shock. We proceeded from these
considerations when we approached our victims. Not wishing to
apply potent poisonous substances, we worked by means of wrong
treatment.
VYSHINSKY: Who are "we"?
LEVIN: Pletnev, Vinogradov, Kazakov and I. All those
whom I have already named to you.
VYSHINSKY: Did you draw up this plan yourself or jointly with any of the people mentioned?
LEVIN: r drew up the plan concerning Alexei Maximovich
Gorky and Valerian Vladimirovich Kuibyshev with Professor
Pletnev, and the one concerning Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky with Kazakov.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Allow me to put a question to
Pletnev.
Accused Pletnev, did you draw up such a plan with Levin?
PLETNEV: Yes.
LEVIN: I will speak of all the four cases. When the question
arose of bringing about the death of Maxim Peshkov, in this
case we worked on the weakening of the organism by the excessive
use of alcoholic beverages. As regards wine, it should be said that
there are people wbo stand liquors very well. All Europe drinks
wine, but it does not have bad effects on everybody. But there
are organisms to which even a small quantity of wine causes
exceptional harm. Among such organisms was that of Peshkov.
There were three systems in his organism that could be very easily
taken advantage of; they were the exceptionally excitable
cardiac-vascular system, his respiratory organs, inherited from
his father, not in the sense of suffering from tuberculosis, but in
the sense of weakness, and finally the vegitative nervous system.
Even a small quantity of wine affected his organism, whereas,
despite this, he drank wine in large quantities. This was his failing.
In this respect Pyotr Petrovich Kryuchkov could well provide
him with company. Kryuchkov drank quite heavily, but with
the difference that wine had a good effect on him, it did him no
harm, whereas on Peshkov its effect was quite different.
Along these lines it was that the preparation began for the
weakening of Maxim Peshkov 's organism; he began to drink
more heavily, whkh for the patient was an easy and pleasant
pastime. He did not at all consider it a burden, but it weakened
his organism to an exceptional degree.
534

Then one very hot day in April, and it was exceptionally hot in
Moscow in the spring of that year, Max, in his weakened condition)
flushed and perspiring, was made to lie down on a bench not far
from the river, at the suggestion of Kryuchkov, who had taken
part in weakening Peshkov's organism. He lay there in the wind
perspiring, without a shirt, for a period of two hours. It was
natural that he caught a chill; he fell sick and in two days croupous pneumonia set in.
This was the first stage of the wrecking work-the preparation
of the patient. This preparation of the patient was carried through.
The patient was very much enfeebled; his heart was in an abominable condition; the nervous system, as we know, plays a tremendous role during infectious diseases. He was altogether
overwrought, altogether weakened and the ailment took an
exceptionally grave turn.
I have already stated that at my first interview with Yagoda I told him that I did not know whether Professor Pletnev
would be drawn into this affair, and I did not call him because
it was clear that the course of the sickness was a very grave
one. I invited Pletnev to a consultation, I went along with him
twice, and we saw that the course of the sickness was very
grave. A. I. Vinogradov, who was invited as doctor on duty,
was also .aware of this. The progress of this sickness was aggravated by the fact that the medicines capable of bringing great
benefit to the heart were eliminated, while, on the contrary, those
that weakened the heart were applied. And finally, as I have already stated, on May 11 he died of pneumonia. That was how
our first wrecking act passed off.
·
I will pass on to the second case-the putting to death of
Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky....
YAGO DA (to the Court): May I put a question to Le'Vin?
THE PRESIDENT: After Levin fini~hes his testimony.
Y.AGODA: This concerns Maxim Gorky's death.
THE PRESIDENT-: When i:he accused Levin finishes, then
by all means.
LEVIN: I met Kazakov at Menzbinsky's house very rnfre-quently. He would usually invite either myself-or Kazakov. At that
time he was a great admirer precisely of Kazakov, and, as I have
. already stated, when there were pauses in Kazakov 's treatment,
I used to visit Menzhinsky, almost always with one of the doctors of the Medical Service of the 0.G.P.U.
There are two systems of lysates, one the so-called sympathicotropous, which undoubtedly injured the cardiac activity
of Menzhinsky, and the other system, vagotropous lysates,
which soothed the heart and were beneficial to him.
535

Kazakov began to prescribe that system of Iysates and that
group, that mixture which was injurious to Menzhinsky's heart.
Account was also taken of the fact that the combination of lysates with heart stimulants could accelerate the process, namely,
aggravate the main element in the state. of his health-myocarditis and angina pectoris-which in its turn was to lead to
new attacks of angina pectoris.
The death of Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky followed
on a new attack of angina pectoris.
THE PRESIDENT: Go on, go on.
LEVIN: Now as regards Kuibyshev. The vulnerable spot in
his organism was his heart, and it was this at which we struck.
We knew that his heart had been in a poor condition over
a considerable period of time. He suffered from an affection
of the cardiac vessels, myocarditis, and he had slight attacks
of angina pectoris. In such cases it is necessary to spare the heart,
to avoid potent heart stimulants, which would excessively stimulate the activity of the heart and gradually lead to its further
weakening. Again there is no need to seek for poison in these
stimulants. The very same extract of digitalis i~ even useful
if administered in moderate quantities to a patient suffering from
other heart diseases. Endocrine gland extracts are also beneficial, but these extracts must be administered with certain
intervals. In the case of Kuibyshev we administered stimulants
for the heart without intervals, over a protracted period, up
to the time he made his trip to Central Asia. Beginning with
August, until September or October 1934, he was given injections
without a break, of special endocrine gland extracts and
other heart stimulants. This intensified and brought on more
frequent attacks of angina pectoris. It was in such a weakened
state that he left for Central Asia. There he unexpectedly contracted an acute illness-he fell sick with a severe form of
tonsilitis with an abscess in the throat, and had to undergo
an operation. Kuibyshev returned from his business trip without
having rid himself of his tonsilitis. An examination showed
that his heart was in a very poor condition. In such a condition the patient should have been ordered to bed, and forbidden
to do any work. I did not do this. He carried on his work.
Then he went to the Council of People's Commissars, and it
was there in his office that he had an attack of angina pectoris.
What his secretary, Maximov, did, undoubtedly hastened Kuibyshev's death. The point is that when Maximov met me, he
would ask about the state of Valerian Vladimirovich Kuibyshev's health and about what would be beneficial and what
harmful to him. We did not say that we knew what the other
was doing. I told him that an attack of angina pectoris might
536

take place. During an attack, Kuibyshev was to lie down without any movement, absolutely quiet. I told him all this, but
knew that he would do the opposite of what I told him, since
he learnt from Yagoda of the preparations for the murder of Kuibyshev. And what was done? I do not knowwhether Maximovorsomebody else was near him, but while suffering from an attack of angina
pectoris he was permitted to leave the building of the Council of
People's Commissars and make his way home unaccompanied. He left
the building, passed under the arch, passed by the dispensary where
there were doctors, but none of them was summoned. He climbed up
to the third floor. A maid was at home, true by chance. When she
saw that he was in a very bad way, she 'phoned to Maximov. Then
it was that the doctor on duty was called. Then I was telephoned
for. When I arrived, I found Kuibyshev already dead.
And, finally, the last case, the putting to death of Alexei
Maximovich Gorky. By this time he was already a very sick man.
His lungs were in a bad state, they were in a threatening condition after the attacks of tuberculosis which, as I have already
stated, frequently afflicted him. In addition, the changes in
the lungs had a terrible effect on the activity of the heart, so that
he was in an extremely poor condition as regards both his lungs
and his heart simultaneously.
Now in the winter of 1935 he was in the Crimea, and there
I spoke to Kryuchkov, who constantly travelled to the Crimea
and was generally in charge of everything in Gorky's house.
We came to an understanding as to measures harmful to Gorky;
I told him that Gorky was very fond of hiking. He ought not
to have indulged in long walks, they tired him out. He, always
used to say that he was suffering because he had to spend all
the time sitting and led a sedentary mode of life. I· s.aid that he
should take walks. Gorky was very fond of manual work, of chopping down branches and breaking pieces of rock in the park, in
the garden. He was allowed to do all this to the detriment of his
health. This tired him out very much. He would sit a whole day
in his study, then go for a walk and in the course of an hour and
a half, while on his walk, would do this work. This used to make
him very tired. His second passion was for fire. Gorky loved fire,
flames, and we made use of this. A bonfire would be lit up for
him. just when Gorky would feel the fatigue after his work, all the
chopped branches were gathered together, and a flame kindled.
Gorky would stand near this bonfire, it was hot there, and all
this had a harmful effect on his health.
Again, it was agreed that a suitable moment should be
selected for Gorky's arrival in Moscow when he could contract
the grippe. He was very susceptible to the grippe, which was
frequently complicated by bronchitis or pneumonia. When Yagoda
537

learnt that someone was suffering from the grippe in Maxim
Gorky's house (the children were sick at that time with
it) he sent word to the Crimea, and Kryuchkov organized Maxim Gorky's return to Moscow at that very time. And in fact,
on the second or third day after his arrival in this grippe-infected
house, Gorky fell sick with the grippe. This was soon complicated
by croupous pneumonia and immediately took a serious turn.
Nonetheless, Professor Pletnev and I considered that the plan
we had drawn up must be carried through, and that for this
purpose use must be made of medicines which would be harmful
to him. We did not administer any special medicines that would
make people wonder why they were being applied. We used only
the medicines that are usually prescribed in such cases, but administered them in very big doses. In the given case, they changed
into their opposite. Again the cardiac motor, under contim1ous
pressure, was losing its power, its working capacity, <1:nd
finally failed. If you will permit me, I will say a few words
about the statement you made yesterday, as regards medicines,
to the effect that a letter had been received from Dr. Belostotsky,
stating that numerous injections were made, and that at one time
strophanthin was used. I do not know that there is anything new
in this. We ourselves do not hide the fact that we used it in very
great quantities. Strophanthin is precisely one of the extracts,
and a very valuable one at that, as is that of digitalis.
I did not like it much, I was rather afraid of it and did not
often resort to it; it was recommended at one of the consultations,·and a couple of injections were made. When, as Dr. Belostotsky quite correctly writes, he asked me whether it was worth while
to continue, I said that it was not worth while to do so because,
as it was, we administered digitalis extracts. So that this letter
does not contain any facts we would hide, it has been dictated
by the vigilance of a Soviet doctor who decided to report what
he knew, and what only goes to confirm what I have now said.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you finished?
LEVIN: I have.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for 30 minutes.

*

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Comrade Procurator, have you any further questions to the accused
·Levin?
·
538

VYSHINSKY: Yes, but I think the accused Yagoda wanted to
put questions to the accused Levin.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Yagoda, you may put questions.
YAGODA: I ask Levin to answer in what year the Kremlin
Medical Commission attached him, Levin, to me as my doctor,
and to whom else he was attached.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Levin, do you remember?
LEVIN: No, I cannot recall in what year I was attached,
but I do remember to whom I was attached. There was a long
list of people.
THE PRESIDENT: Well, approximately when?
LEVIN: I don't remember that either. It was undoubtedly
in the late 'twenties.
YAGO DA: There was a decision of the Kremlin Medical Commission attaching you to me as my doctor.
LEVIN: It is not the Medical Commission, but the Kremlin
Sanitary Administration that does that, and the Kremlin Sanitary
Administration passes no decisions in writing in this respect. It was
done this way: I would be called into the office of the head
of the Sanitary Administration and told: "You are to attend to
the treatment of such-and-such responsible officials." Recently
I had a list of twenty-four people, but this was done again in recent times when several patients went off my list, and I was called
into the office of the head of the Sanitary Administration and told:
"You have so many free places, you are to attend to the treatment
of the new People's Commissars.'' Thus there were no decisions pass.ed that could help me to remember when I was attached to this or
that patient; I repeat, there were no such decisions, nowhere
is the fact recorded that I was attached to some patient or other,
but there are lists in the Kremlin Sanitary Administration which
state that Levin has such-and-such patients, while Burmin has
such-and-such patients.
YAGODA: I have no more questions.
VYSHINSKY: Was a case history of ·Maxim Alexeyevich
Peshkov kept?
LEVIN: We had no case history.
VYSHfNSKY: Was it recorded?
LEVIN: Of course not. We have a medical file, an archive,
and in this archive all case histories are kept.
VYSHfNSKY: When you treated Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov,
did you record nothing in his case history?
LEVIN: No, I did not.
539

VYSHINSKY: Why?
LEVIN: Because we had a medical pass for Alexei Maximovich Gorky, and on this were listed the members of his family,
so that, properly speaking, it was Alexei Maximovich Gorky who
was under the care of the Kremlin Sanitary Administration.
VYSHINSKY: But you did treat Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov,
and did not keep his case history?
LEVIN: That is so.
VYSHINSKY: You treated Alexei Maximovich Gorky, who
was on the lists of the Sanitary Administration. He had a son,
Maxim Alexeyevich, who was also in the lists, but you did not
keep his case history?
LEVIN: That is so.
VYSHINSKY: But why? You explain this by the fact that he
was not registered independently?
LEVIN: No, it is very simple. The Kremlin Sanitary Administration considered that the chief owner of the card was under
its care and was to receive its great attention, while the others were
the so-called members of the family.
VYSHINSKY: So that case histories for members of the
family are not the rule?
LEVIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: Do you usually keep case histories for members of the families?
LEVIN: No, we do not.
VYSHINSKY: Do all those who are treated by you have their
case histories?
LEVIN: No. Basic workers possess so-called medical diaries
that are kept in the medical file.
Members of the family are not even entitled to the services
of the so-called central polyclinic.
VYSHINSKY: What is the sense of a case history, what is
its purpose?
.
LEVIN: Don't you see, when a patient is in the hospital,
there is a whole service staff there.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, what is the sense of a case history,
what is it intended for?
LEVIN: So as to leave a record.
VYSHINSKY: I ask you, was the case history of Maxim
Alexeyevich Peshkov recorded?
LEVIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: Tell me precisely what were the doses
of the medicaments administered to Alexei Maximovich Gorky.

540

LEVIN: As regards Alexei Maximovich Gorky the line was
as follows: to use such medicines, which were in general indicated, against which no doubt or suspicion could arise and which
could be used to stimulate the activity of the heart. Among such
medicines were camphor, caffeine, ·cardiosol, digalen. We have
the right to apply these medicines for a group of cardiac diseases.
But in his case they were administered in tremendous doses. Thus,
for example, he received as many as forty injections of camphor.
VYSHINSKY: Over what period of time?
LEVIN: Between thirty and forty injections in twenty-four
hours. This dose was too heavy for him.
VYSHINSKY: We shall ask the opinion of experts.
LEVIN: Absolutely correct. A surgeon gives six injections
at one time, but we gave from thirty to forty. This in itself was not
injurious.
VYSHINSKY: Thirty to forty injections of camphor to start
with, plus ... ?
LEVIN: Plus two injections of digalen.
VYSHINSKY: That's forty-two, plus ...?
LEVIN: Plus four injections of caffeine.
VYSHINSKY: That's forty-six, plus ... ?
LEVIN: Plus two injections of strychnine.
VYSHINSKY: That's forty-eight.
LEVIN: Forty-eight. In addition to myself, an outstanding
physician from Leningrad, Professor Lang, and such a famous physiologist as Professor Speransky were invited. I wish to say that
such big doses may be employed, but not in the case of
Gorky, not in his case. I take the liberty of making a brief medical premise. For anybody else it is not so terrible, but for him
it was ...
VYSHINSKY: Terrible?
LEVIN: Of course. After all that Gorky had undergone, and
given the condition of his heart and lungs, such doses were
injurious.
· VYSHINSKY: Did you know that this was injurious for him?
LEVIN: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: From what did Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov
suffer?
LEVIN: Croupous pneumonia.
VYSHINSKY: In that case anti-pneumococcus serum is employed?
LEVIN: It is.
541

VYSH INSKY: Did you resort to it?
LEVIN: No.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
LEVIN: Out of wrecking considerations.
VYSHINSKY: So that you deliberately did not employ the
means that would ordinarily be employed?
LEVIN: That is so.
VYSHINSKY: For wrecking purposes? Is that how I am to
understand you?
LEVIN: You understand me correctly.
VYSHINSKY: And now, allow me to ask you about Alexei
Maximovich Gorky-what medicines did you employ, and what
doses did you administer?
LEVIN: From thirty to forty ampoules of camphor per day,
two ampoules of strychnine, two ampoules of digalen, four ampoules
of caffeine. This was the standard quota drawn up by Professor
Pletnev and myself for each day, from the very outset of his sickness; of course these doses were gradually increased as the patient's
weakness increased-a situation that would appear natural to
those around him, since his heart required stimulation. But his
heart and lungs were in such a state that this dose of stimulants
was too big. Then again, he was given a number of other injections,
which, however, were beneficial to him. Thus, for example,
urotropine was introduced intravenously, a remedy usually administered in similar cases, and glucose was introduced-a splendid
and salutary medicine for the heart. This was done by that very
Dr. Belostotsky who sent you this letter and whom I myself sent
there.
VYSHINSKY: I shall request the Court to undertake the
examination regarding Dr. Belostotsky's testimony when this
testimony here has been completed.
Next question. I would like you exactly to indicate what cardiac stimulants were employed in the case of Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky during the last period of his sickness.
LEVIN: I repeat once again that all this can be understood
in connection with the brief introduction I have made. lf
I present a list of these medicines, it will not show anything
exceptional. There was digitalis there, adonis vernalis, and strophanthin. All these are medicines that intensify, stimulate the
activity of the heart. Simultaneously Kazakov was also acting
in the same direction with his lysates. The one renders the
other more potent. When combined, all this was intensified to an
extent beyond the strength of Vyacheslav Rudolfovich 's heart.
542

VYSHINSKY: But the size of the doses is also of importance
here?
LEVIN: The doses in this case were normal.
VYSHINSKY: The secret lay not in the doses? In what
then?
LEVIN: In the doses and in the point with which I began,
namely, in the fact that the methods of treatment are contraindicated (what is good for one man is bad for another).
VYSH INS KY: Consequently the medicines were legal, but their
combination, their quantity and their administering to the
given patient did not correspond to the state of his health, of his
organism?
LEVIN: No. Vyacheslav Rudolfovich suffered from a terrible
infarct, which left his heart muscles all scarred.
VYSHINSKY: And in these conditions ...
LEVIN: Such potent medicines should not have been administered.
VYSHINSKY: But you did?
LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Again for criminal ends?
LEVIN: Of course.
'VYSHINSKY: Allow me to put a similar question regarding
Valerian Vladimirovich Kuibyshev.
·LEVIN: Hypertonia, excessive blood pressure and a small manifes.tation of likely angina pectoris. In this case it should be considered that the venous vessels of the heart are affected by a
sclerotic process. The heart muscles can no longer be fed as they
should be. The heart muscles demand a constant inflow of blood
just as the muscles of the hand, when you are working, tlemand an
increased inflow of oxygen. If this does not take place, then this
can lead to embolism, to thrombosis and that is what actually happened. When the autopsy was held thrombosis of the outer artery
was found. This was the result of an attack of angina pectoris.
This thrombosis hastened on the attack, although according to the
state of health this would have happened at a later date, but thanks
to it the advent of these attaeks was speeding up.
VYSHINSKY: As the result ...
LEVIN: ... of wrecking work.
VYSH I NSKY: As a result of so-called "treatment"?
LEVIN: As a result of wrecking work.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE BRAUDE (to the Court): May I put
some questions? (To Levin.) Please tell the Court a few brief details of your biography.
LEVIN: I will be very brief. I was born in 1870, in a poor
543

middle class family. At fourteen years of age, while still at high
school, I had to earn money by giving lessons, in order to continue
my education and help my family. I graduated from the Faculty of
Natural Sciences in Odessa and after this the Medical Faculty in
Moscow. I have practised as a doctor since 1896, and so I have been
in the profession for forty-two years. During these years I worked
all the time prior to the revolution in hospitals, I worked in the
Moscow Workers' Hospital, and at the same time practised as a
doctor in factories and industrial plants. From the very outbreak
of the revolution I immediately associated myself with the work of
the People's Commissariat of Health. I joined the staff of one of
the Commissariat's hospitals, the so-called health resort-selection
hospital, from where I was called up to the Red Army. In the Red
Army I served with the Interior Defence units of the Republic. At
the same time I was on the Central Medical Commission, and in
1920 by order of the People's Commissariat of Health was commissioned to the Kremlin Hospital. Since then I have been engaged
all the time, without a break and without any concurrent jobs, in
the Kremlin Medical Administration. I was also on the staff of the
Medical Service of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs,
as a consulting physician.
This, so to speak, is my working record. During all this time
I worked, I never had any misunderstandings, I have not had any
Court record, and for the first time in my life, in my sixty-eighth
year, I have been sent to the dock by Yagoda.
BRAUDE: When Yagoda was persuading you to undertake the
murder of Maxim Peshkov, did he hint that the instructions about
this murder did not come from him alone?
LEVIN: He told me that the matter concerned a group of leading political figures, among whom he mentioned the names of
Rykov, Bukharin, and Yenukidze, whom I knew personally.
BRAUDE: Did he not put you in touch with one of the members
of this organization? Did he not direct you to Yenukidze?
LEVIN: Quite right.
BRAUDE: Tell the Court what Yagoda said about Yenukidze
and the contents of your conversation with Yenukidze.
LEVIN: This was during our conversation in 1934, when he
spoke to me about Valerian Vladimirovich Kuibyshev and Alexei
Maximovich Gorky. He asked me to go to see Yenukidze, who
knew that I was initiated into this affair and wanted to speak to
me about it. Yenukidze was also one of my regular patients.
I visited him the next day in the Kremlin. He also asked me whom
I could take, and he was very disappointed to hear me mention
only Kuibyshev. He said: "Well, start with him." He told me
to think about an accomplice, and I said that I would think it over
and let Yagoda know.
544

BRAUDE: Tell me, through whom else did Yagoda exert
influence on you? Who was your direct superior in your work as
physician?
LEVIN: Latterly, Khodorovsky.
BRAUDE: Did he send you to Khodorovsky?
LEVIN: He first sent me to Metalikov. At that time I went
-0n vacation, and when I returned (it was in the autumn of 1934),
there was a change of superiors, and the head of the Kremlin
Medical Administration was no longer Metalikov, but Khodorovsky.
I told Yagoda that Khodorovsky was a new man and that I did not
know him. But he replied that Khodorovsky was informed of the
matter and that I should go and talk to him. Khodorovsky was a very
taciturn and abrupt man. He did not like me generally, and I did
not particularly admire him. I nevertheless went to see him.
I could not make up my mind to mention the matter at once,
but when the opportunity offered I referred to Yenukidze 's health.
He listened to me and asked: "And did he say nothing else to
you?" I replied that he told me something else. Khodorovsky said:
"I know what you talked about. Don't let us talk about it, but
act; and if you need my help, come and see me, but do not do it
often, only in urgent cases.'' This ended our brief and only conversation.
BRAUDE: And from this conversation you understood that
your direct superior . . .
LEVIN: That he was not opposed to it . . .
BRAUDE: And sanctioned your criminal and villainous actions?
LEVIN: Yes.
.
BRAUDE: Tell us, please, to what exact period do you date
your entry onto the path of these frightful crimes, counting the
beginning of the conversations.
LEVIN: I can tell you quite definitely. It was in the winier
of 1933.
BRAUDE: Perhaps you will specifically summarize the intrinsic reasons which caused you, an old physician of forty years' standing, to agree to Yagoda 's gruesome and villainous proposals?
LEVIN: I have already attempted to speak of my psychological state, but . . .
THE PRESIDENT: TheCounsel forDefencehasputyou a question. Please answer.
LEVIN: I committed some act of insanity, an act of idiocy,
suddenly, without any reason, to go and murder Maxim Peshkov. I loved this family very much, I was very close to them.
I loved Alexei Maximovich very much and considered him one of
the greatest men of our country and the whole world. How could
I sink to this, and how could Yagoda say here that I consented
35

545

to murder Maxim Peshkov without his direct instructions? Why
I agreed to this, I have already said. I say this not in justification,
but in explanation. I am a man who is remote from politics, a nonParty man. Wrongly, perhaps, but r was dazzled by the power
of the representative of the O.G.P.U.; he seemed to me to be an
omnipotent person, in whose hands a tremendous amount
of power was concentrated. And if this man said that I must do
this, then I did it. Psychologically, I explain it by a sort of
cowardice-not for my own life, that I say in all sincerity. What
frightened me most was his threat to destroy my family. And my
family is a good, working, Soviet family.
BRAUDE: Tell us, please, was there any difference in the
methods by which Yagoda influenced you between the time when
he persuaded you to murder Maxim Peshkov and a later time,
when he spoke of further crimes?
LEVIN: Of course, the difference was very marked. First he
said that I was doing something that was necessary. He spoke about
this crime as an act that was needed to save Alexei Maximovich
from certain enemies. And then, when I came to him, he at once
declared that I was in his hands.
BRAUDE: Did he tell you what directing organizations were
guiding this business?
LEVIN: I knew nothing about it. I learnt about it only at the
trial itself.
BRAUDE: Did he tell you that there was a group which was
striving for the overthrow of the Soviet power?
LEVIN: He said that it was a very big and influential
group.
BRAUDE: And from that moment you felt that you were
bound up with this group, knowing that it was a counter-revolutionary group and that your fate depended upon the fate of this
group?
LEVIN: I had a feeling that I would perish with Yagoda.
BRAUDE: I have no more questions.
KOMMODOV: May I put a question?
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
KOMMODOV: Tell us, Levin, when did your conversation
with Kazakov about the killing of Menzhinsky take place?
LEVIN: It was at the end of 1933.
KOMMODOV: Was this before Kazakov's meeting with Yagoda?
LEVIN: Of course.
. KOMMODOV And did you begin to employ the wrecking
methods of treating Menzhinsky after your meeting with Kazakov,
or before?
546

LEVIN: After.
KOMMODOV: Did you learn about Kazakov from Yagoda?
LEVIN: I knew that Menzhinsky was Kazakov's regular
patient and one that believed in him strongly. I remember that
as far back as 1932, when Menzhinsky was in Sochi and did not
feel quite well, he summoned Kazakov to Sochi. I also remember
that when Menzhinsky went to Kislovodsk, I think it was in 1933,
he expressed the wish that Kazakov should be called there. He
had close relations with Kazakov, and without him I could do
nothing.
KOMMODOV: But you began to do practical wrecking work
after Kazakov had seen Yagoda and Yagoda had spoken to him?
LEVIN: After Kazakov had had a conversation with Yagoda.
After that Kazakov and I drew up the plan for our wrecking activities about which I have already spoken, the plan for the treatment of the heart by lysates.
KOMMODOV: Did you tell Pletnev about Yagoda's plan,
about Yagoda 's instructions and about Pl etnev 's forthcoming
meeting with Yagoda?
LEVIN: This was very shortly after the death of Maxim
Peshkov. I told him that Yagoda wanted to see him on a very
difficult matter and that he would tell him about it himself.
KOMMODOV: Did you, before Yagoda summoned Pletnev,
carry out any wrecking measures with regard to anyone, with
·
Pletnev as a consultant?
LEVIN: No. This was only after Professor Pletnev had seen
Yagoda. I met him again, and he told me that, like myself, he
considered the acceptance of Yagoda 's instructions as unavoidable.
We consulted together how to perform our wrecking work with
regard to Valerian Vladimirovich Kuibyshev and Alexei Maximovich Gorky, and we then decided to begin with Valerian Vladimirovich. This we actually did in 1934, and at tile beginning
of 1935 he died.
·
KOMMODOV Did you tell Yagoda that he should summon
Pletnev himself?
;
LEVIN: I told him that Dmitry Dmitrievich Ptetnev might
tle an accomplice. He said that I should warn Pletnev that he
would call him, and I think that Yagoda summoned him on the
pretext of needing medical advice. I do not know exactlyDmitry Dmitrievich will tell you himself-but I think that he called
him ostensibly for advice about the condition ~f hi& heart.
KOMMODOV: So Yagoda told you that he.would call in Pletnev under the pretext of needing medical advice?
LEVIN:, He did not say so, but I seem to recall that Dmitry
Dmitrievich said so. Perhaps Dmitry Dmitrievich will deny it.
KOMMODOV: But did Yagoda himself say so?
35*

547

LEVIN: Yes, he said that he would summon Pletnev himself and
talk to him.
BUKHARIN: I have a question to put to Dr. Levin. Was he
not one of. those who during the October Revolution and immediately after the revolution sabotaged the proletariat which
had risen?
LEVIN: I could not be even a participator in sabotage, let
alone a leader, because at that time I did not work in any hospital.
What is sabotage? It is abandoning one's work.
BUKHARIN: I know that. Was not Dr. Levin a Menshevik
or a direct sympathizer of the Mensheviks?
LEVIN: If you were to ask me what a Menshevik is, I would
disgrace myself in this Court room. So you had better not ask me.
VYSHINSKY: I spoke to you about the organization of the
murders you have spoken of here. As I understood you, Yagoda also
explained to you the political motives which guided him?
LEVfN: He did. I have already mentioned them. He said thtrt
dissatisfaction with the Party leadership was growing within the
Party.
VYSHINSKY: Did Yagoda say this?
LEVIN: Yes. That this dissatisfaction was spteading throughout the country and that there was hardly a single big institution
in which there were not people who were dissatisfied with this
leadership and who did not consider it necessary to replace it by
other people. He also spoke to me about the necessity of other
people coming to power ....
VYSHINSKY: In what way? With whose assistance?
LEVIN: Well, when he concluded this introductory historical
information, he said that in order to facilitate this we must remove from the political arena certain members of the Political
Bureau and Alexei Maximovich Gorky. In a second conversation
he explained why Alexei Maximovich. Because Alexei Maximovich was a supporter, a staunch supporter, of the line of the Party
leadership, and in particular he was a great admirer and follower
of Stalin's whole policy; he was also his personal friend, would
not betray him under any circumstances, and would always stand
in our way and always spoil things for us. He had to be removeti.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Levin~ Yagoda's designs to murder
political leaders of our state as expressed to you bore a quite obvious and open counter-revolutionary character?
LEVIN: Yes. Everything was clear.
VYSHINSKY: And your attitude towards this was not merely
.one of a technician, but also of a politician?
LEVIN: I do not know what you mean by that. I have never
·
been a politician in my life.
VYSHINSKY: You say that you have never engaged in politics?
548

LEVIN: Never.
VYSHINSKY: But you acted as a political enemy.
LEVIN: I acted as a tool of a political enemy.
VYSHINSKY: And consequently?
LEVIN: As a political enemy.
VYSHINSKY: And you were thus drawn not only into these
murders. but into a whole chain of crimes ....
LEVIN: I served these conspirators involuntarily.
VYSHINSKY: You understood that it meant fighting the Soviet power?
LEVIN: What I have come to understand here in Court, I did
not understand then.
VYSHINSKY: In Court you perceived the dreadful picture ...
LEVIN: Yes. at that time I did not realize it. did not know it.
VYSHINSKY: But what you did know then was also appallingly sinister.
LEVIN: Yes, I understand.
VYSHINSKY: You understood that it meant fighting the Soviet power?
LEVIN: I did.
VYSH INS KY: And, drawn into this by the artful machinations
of Yagoda, you joined the enemies of the Soviet power? And in this
struggle against the Soviet power. in the struggle which you joined,
you also took part in this struggle?
LEVIN: Unfortunately, I did. I would only like ...
VYSHINSKY: But this is political activity?
LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Although of a bandit character. Is that true or
not?
LEVIN: Yes. I only want to say that one can join when one
sympathizes, participates and holds the same views. I would only
like to point out-not in order to justify myself. I have told the
truth from the very first day I entered prison-that I joined this
affair as a result of a fatal combination of circumstances, and not
because I sympathized with the coming to power ...
VYSHINSKY: But if you were an honest man, an honest Soviet citizen, you should have gone to somebody. :you should have
told somebody about these threats, and so :on.
LEVIN: He told me to bear in mind that he would follow every
one of my steps. and that before I could cross anybody's threshold
I would fall into his hands.
VYSHINSKY: Well, now you have crossed the threshold ...
LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: If you considered .yourself an honest citizen
of your country ...
LEVIN: I did.
549

VYSHINSKY: A Soviet physician ..•
LEVIN: I did.
VYSHINSKY: Having learnt about this sinister plot, what
should you have done?
LEVIN: I should have informed about it.
VYSHINSKY: Having been invited to become a participant,
and even more, an organizer, of the murder of prominent Soviet
people and of the genius of Russian culture, Gorky, what should
you have done if you really loved Gorky and your country?
LEVIN: Refused to do this and informed on Yagoda.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you not do it?
LEVIN: From cowardice.
·
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you thought that there is no
beast stronger than the cat?
LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: That the strongest and most ter.rible cat was
Yagoda?
LEVIN: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: And what do you think now?
LEVIN: Oh, it is clear.
VYSHINSKY: I further want to ask you; tell us honestly:
did you think that there was no law against Yagoda?
LEVIN: I realize it perfectly clearly now. In general, when one
looks back retrospectively on the past, one says to oneself: "My god,
why did I not do this, why did I not do that?''
VYSHINSKY: How long did your participation in this criminal activity last?
LEVIN: Three years.
VYSHINSKY: Three years! You had thousands of opportunities in that time to act honestly.
LEVIN: Yes, and I did not avail myself of them.
VYSHINSKY: You did not avail yourself of them because, as
you say, you were a coward?
LEVIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Are you such a coward?
LEVIN: Yes, a coward.
KOMMODOV: May I put a question to the accused Levin?
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
KOMMODOV: In connection with the question which the accused Bukharin put to you, tell us, please, what were you doing at
the time of the October Revolution?
LEVIN: At that time hospitals for so-called war victims were
still functioning in Moscow. I was in charge of several of these
hospihils.
KOMMODOV~ And continued to work all the time?
LEVIN: Yes.
550

KOMMODOV: And di"d not stop work for a single day?
LEVIN: No, not for a single day. And later, when the hospitals were closed, I received an appointment in the People's Commissariat of Health. When the work in the hospital ended, I went
to the People's Commissariat oj Health and asked for work there,
.and after a while I received an appointment in a health resort hospital.
KOMMODOV: And so the suspicion that you sabotaged is not
·confirmed?
LEVIN: No, of course not. A house surgeon might sabotage,
but I was not a house surgeon.
KOMMODOV: Have y,.ou ever belonged to any party?
LEVIN: No.
KOMMODOV: Perhaps you belonged to some national party,
Jewish, for. example?
LEVIN: Not to any party, only to the physicians' party.
KOMMODOV: And we do not know of such a party.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the expert witnesses any questions
to ask the accused Levin?
SHERESHEVSKY and VINOGRADOV: The expert witnesses
have no questions to ask; everything is quite clear.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment until 6 p. m.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
PresUlent of the Milita.ry Collegi,um of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R..

PRESIDENT:

SECRETARY:

A. BATNER
Militaiy Jurist First Rank

551

EVENING SESSION, MARCH 8, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated,, The session is resumed.
Accused Bulanov, do you confirm the testimony you gave at
the preliminary investigation?
BULANOV: Yes, I do. A number of facts and particulars,
about which I gave information at the preliminary investigation, when interrogated by the Procurator, and of which I shall
now speak, are known to me from Yagoda personally, from conversations I had with him or from conversations he had with other
accomplices in my presence.
During the years I worked with Yagoda as his private secretary
and as secretary of the People's Commissariat, I became accustomed to regard everything through Yagoda 's eyes, for many years
spending a considerable part of the day in the People's Commissariat, near Yagoda and for Yagoda, and was wholly and completely cut off from Party life, from the Party and from public
life. If I might so express it, he was my only light. And in the
end Yagoda made of me a man who was thoroughly devoted to him~
a man about whom he knew that he would not betray him. And,
therefore, neither in conversations with me, nor in conversations.
with others in my presence, did he keep any secrets from me,
there were no elements of secrecy whatever. Hence my knowledge
of the crimes, which I learnt about from him.
I must say that approximately in 1931, for the first time, quite
unexpectedly for me, apparently considering that I was a man
already thoroughly schooled and coached, Yagoda told me that
he was a Right. I first heard about the conspiracy from Yagoda
in 1934. Gradually, in a series of conversations, Yagoda introduced me to counter-revolutionary work. Cut off from Party life,
I blindly trusted him, Yagoda, in everything.
VYSHINSKY: In what year do you say Yagoda told you that
he was a Right?
BULANOV: In 1931.
VYSHINSKY: Since when have you worked with Yagoda?
BULANOV: Roughly, since the end of 1929.
VYSHINSKY: Continue your testimony.
552

BULANOV: One day, during a conversation, Yagoda told
me that they (that is, he and the people who stood behind him-·
the Rights) had united with the Trotskyites and the Zinovievites,
that there could be absolutely no counting on achieving any success in the normal way, by means of a legal struggle within the
Party, and that only one means remained by which they could:
attain power-that was the violent method of arriving at power by
a direct armed coup.
One of the principal roles in the coup, according to him, was
to have been played by Yenukidze, and the second, perhaps a no
less important role, according to him, fell on his, Yagoda 's, shoulders. They had spheres of influence: Yenukidze's was the Kremlin~
and Yagoda's the apparatus of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs. Yagoda himself on this occasion; and repeatedly,
dreamed-true, I should not call them dreams, because he conceived it rather clearly as a reality-that in the event of the coup
succeeding, in the future Council of People's Commissars he was
to be the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars.
VYSHINSKY: The Chairman of the Council of People's Com-:
missars?
BULANOV: Yes. Party work; as he envisaged it, would fall
to Tomsky, Bukharin and Rykov. And, furthermore, as they presumed and supposed, Tomsky was to retain the role of leader of:
the trade unions. Rykov and Bukharin were to be the Secretaries
of the Central Committee. And Yagoda, moreover, stressed the
point that when he became the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, the functions of the Secretaries of the Central
Committee would be something quite different. What exactlyt
I could hardly explain.
I recall-I request the Court to bear in mind that what I am
testifying was not the subject of any one corlversation; I say thiS>
from conversations that took place at various times, conversations with me alone, and conversations in the presence of others;
Yagoda was not the least embarrassed by my presence-I am
summing up all the conversations, and I fully answer for the accuracy of my statements.
In this connection I recall a parallel which Yagoda drew between the future Secretary of the future Central Committee, Bukharin, and Goebbels. I must say that in general Yagoda was very
much infatuated with Hitler.
VYSHINSKY: He was infatuated with fascism generally? But
in particular?
BULANOV: He was infatuated with Hitler, and said that
his book, "My Struggle," was a really worth-while book.
VYSHINSKY: A worth-while book?

553

BULANOV: He repeatedly stressed the fact that Hitler had
risen from a top sergeant to be the man he is.
VYSH INSKY: And was not Yagoda himself a top sergeant
formerly?
BULANOV: I do not know, but his behaviour differed very
little from that of a top sergeant.
If my memory does not deceive me, Yenukidze was slated
for the post of Chairman of the Central Executive Committee
in the future government.
VYSHINSKY: But what has Goebbels to do with it?
BULANOV: He said that Bukharin would be no worse than
Goebbels under him.
VYSHINSKY: He said that about Bukharin?
BULANOV: It must be presumed that when he drew this parallel, as far as I understand and conceive it, he intended to say
that he, as Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars, with
a Secretary of the type of Goebbels, and with a Central Committee
that would be completely obedient to him, would rule as he liked.
That is how I understood him. I think that I formed a correct
idea as far as he was concerned.
The idea was that Bukharin would be a puppet in his hanlis
and would do whatever he, Yagoda, pleased.
As Yagoda put it, they considered that the armed coup must
absolutely be timed to coincide with war. I once said to Yagoda in
perplexity: "To tell the truth, I don't understand. War, direct
danger, a tense situation, and a government upheaval at such a
time--why, it might cause very, very serious damage at the front."
To this Yagoda bluntly replied that I was very naive if I thought
that they, statesmen of such a big calibre, would embark upon
a coup without having come to an arrangement with the probable
.and inevitable antagonists of the U.S.S.R. in a war. The Germans
and Japanese were mentioned as the antagonists. He told me outright that they had a direct arrangement that in the event of the
success of the coup, the new government that would be formed
would be recognized and military hostilities would cease.
VYSHINSKY: On what conditions?
BULANOV: I hesitate to say exactly, but I have a recollection
of concessions and cessions. This was the first time I heard
that Krestinsky and Karakhan were absolutely their men, and,
moreover, not only responsible men, but men who knew how to
work-to work, of course, in a counter-revolutionary sense. It
was very much later that I heard mention of the name of Tukhachevsky, who in the futuregovernmentwasto be People's Commissar of Defence.
554

VYSHINSKY: And what can you tell us about connections
with the Trotskyites?
BULANOV: I shall come to that later.
To be brief, and at the same time precise, I shall now pass to
that part of my crimes in which, on the direct orders of Yagoda,
I had an immediate part-the poisoning.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps you will first tell us of all the criminal
-connections that existed, and of the agreement that existed, and
then about the definite particulars of the poisoning.
BULANOV: Very well, as you please.
VYSHINSKY: Did you know that Yagoda, as a member of the
centre of the Rights, was connected with the Trotskyites?
BULANOV: I did.
VYSHINSKV: How did you know that? With whom was he
·connected, and how was he connected?
BULANOV: It was quite obvious that Yagoda had the closest
.connections with the leaders of the Rights. He was also connected
with the Trotskyites. I judge of this because I was more than once
.a witness to the direct operative instructions, which he gave
in one degree or another to the appropriate persons in ch,arge
-0f definite sections of the work, direct or indirect orders not
to proceed with cases against Trotskyites, but, on the contrary, to
terminate a number of cases against Trotskyites, as well as Rights
.and Zinovievites.
VYSHINSKY: That is, he shielded them.
BULANOV: I would say that he not only shielded them but
·directly assisted their activities.
Not to make unsupported statements, I will cite a number of
'facts. For example, Yagoda gave orders that in his testimony
Uglanov should keep within certain limits.
VYSHINSKY: Do you remember a sinister figure in one of
i:he earlier trials, Dreitzer? What relations did Yagoda hav~ with
him?
·
BULANOV: I recall that, in spite of the fact that the department chief concerned possessed absolutely definite and precise
facts about Dreitzer 's prolonged Trotskyite activities, Dreitzer
was not arrested. And, iil general, I must say that Yagoda 's line
with regard to the Rights, as well as the Trotskyites and the Zinovievites, was most definitely directed towards terminating the
struggle with them.
VYSHINSKY: I am interested in definite facts.
BULANOV: That was the general line; and only when there
was a Party reminder or a public reminder, when a number of
odious figures were openly involved, did he adopt repressive measures; and these repressive measures were quite a matter of form.

555

VYSHINSKY: Yagoda knew of Dreitzer's conspiratorial activities and shielded him?
BULANOV: Absolutely correct.
VYSHINSKY: And do you recall another figure in one of the
earlier trials, a no less sinister one, Ivan Nikitich Smirnov? Do
you know whether Yagoda was connected with him and whether
he shielded him?
BULANOV: Of the particulars regarding Srnirnov, I know
precisely that when Smirnov was in prison, Yagoda sent Molchanov and through him instructed Smirnov within what limits.
he should keep in case of necessity, if certain testimony should be
demanded of him. That is absolutely so.
VYSHINSKY: And do you know what Yagoda did when Srnirnov was brought from prison to Moscow?
• BULANOV: I know that Yagoda departed from his usual
practice. He did not usually visit prisons, but when Smirnov arrived he went to see him.
VYSHINSKY: In his cell?
BULANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What did he do there?
BULANOV: I heard him say to Molchanov that he, Yagoda~
was easy in his mind about the way Srnirnov would conduct himself in Court.
VYSHINSKY: That is, he coached him. What was his attitude
to Kamenev after the assassination of Sergei Mironovich Kirov?
BULANOV: When the decision was taken to arrest Kamenev
and Zinoviev, Yagoda sent me to arrest Karnenev.
VYSHINSKY: Whom did he send with you?
BULANOV: I went with Pauker.
VYSHINSKY: Who was this Pauker?
BULANOV: Chief of the Operations Department.
VYSHlNSKY: And yet, who was he?
BULANOV: A man who was completely initiated into the
conspiratorial affairs and one who was exceptionally trusted. He
was the connecting link with Yenukidze.
VYSHINSKY: Was not Pauker a German spy?
BULANOV: I learnt later that he was a spy.
VYSHINSKY: A German spy?
BULANOV: Quite so.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, did you know that Pauker
was a German spy?
· YAGODA: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: Be seated. So Pauker and you, Bulanov, were
sent by Yagoda to arrest Kamenev. And who was to arrest Zinov..i
i~
'
556

BULANOV: I think it was Molchanov and Volovich.
VYSHINSKY: Who was Molchanov?
BULANOV: Chief of the Secret Political Department of the
People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs and a member of the
-0rganizati on.
VYSHINSKY: Of which organization? The secret organization of the Rights?
BULANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And Volovich?
BULANOV: Volovich was Assistant Chief of the Operations
Department. It is known that he was implicated in espionage.
VYSHINSKY: Do you confirm, Yagoda, that Volovich was
.also a German spy?
YAGODA: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bulanov, how did Yagoda instruct
you when he sent you to arrest Kamenev and Zinoviev?
BULANOV: The instructions were quite simple-to bring
them in, but not to make a search. And that is what I did.
VYSHINSKY: And that is what you did. Now continue your
-story.
BULANOV: I shall proceed directly to the specific crimes
in which I personally took part. I know from what Yagoda told
. me that the decision to assassinate Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhov ...
VYSHINSKY: Did you know where Rykov's secret files were
·kept?
BULANOV: Yagoda had them.
VYSHINSKY: The conspiratorial files?
BULANOV: If they were not conspiratorial, Rykov would
hardly have sought such a reliable place for them.
I now pass to the attempt on the life of N. I. Yezhov. According to Yagoda, the decision to assassinate Nikolai Ivanovich
Yezhov was adopted by them, i.e., by the centre, with exclusively political aims. This was one of the stages, or one of the measures,
to ensure them against exposure as participants in the conspiracy,
.and therefore to preserve the possibility of carrying out the con·spiracy itself. The reason that led to the adoption of this decision
was that very soon, or rather, after the assassination of Kirov,
Yezhov was appointed by the Central Committee of the C.P .S. U.
-(Bolsheviks) to watch the investigation. And I learnt from Yagoda
personally that very soon after this Yagoda became extremely
.and increasingly alarmed over N. I. Yezhov's work. Yagoda
stressed the fact that Yezhov was extremely rapidly, as he put it,
digging into and mastering all the special features of the work of
·the Administration of State Security, and that there was absolutely
557

no certainty that in the end he would not arrive straight at the
discovery of the true state of affairs, at the discovery of the conspiracy. Yagoda-this I again know from his conversations with a
number of the chiefs of operations departments who were at the
same time members of the conspiratorial organization-employed
every means he could to misinform N. I. Yezhov. Only those materials, information and records were sent to Yezhov that were picked
out by Yagoda and his assistants. Corresponding information and
documents were concealed and held back. In general, everything
was done to hamper Yezhov's work. Yet in spite of this, at the
beginning of the first third of 1936 Yagoda said outright that he
not only had absolutely no assurance, no guarantee, that Yezhov
would not dig down to the true state of affairs, but that, on the
contrary, he was already convinced that he was so far on the right
path that resolute measures would have to be adopted to localize
a really impending danger.
In the early part of 1936 I first learnt that Yagoda had known
at the time how the assassination of Kirov was organized. One
day I happened to enter Yagoda 's office, as always without being
announced, and found him in a state of excitement talking tc>
Molchanov. When Molchanov left, Yagoda, in a state of great irritation, uttered the phrase: "It looks as if Yezhov is also getting
at the bottom of the Leningrad affair." Then, pulling himself
up, although he usually concealed nothing from me, and warning
me of the extremely confidental nature of what he was about t()
tell me, and once again-for the twentieth or fortieth time-promising, "if anything should happen," to tear my head off, he
said that he had known that an attempt on S. M. Kirov was being
prepared, th.at he had had a reliable man in Leningrad who was
initiated into everything, Zaporozhetz, Assistant Chief of the Leningrad Regional Administration of the People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs, and that he had so arranged matters as to facilitate the assassination of Kirov by Nikolayev. To put it plainly,.
it was done with the direct connivance, and consequently with the
assistance, of Zaporozhetz. I recall that Yagoda said in passing~
incidentally abusing Zaporozhetz for his lack of efficiency, that
there was an occasion when the whole affair was nearly exposed,
when several days before the assassination of Kirov the guard
detained Nikolayev by mistake, and a notebook and revolver were
found in his portfolio, but that Zaporozhetz released him in time.
Yagoda further told me that Borisov, an employee of the Leningrad Administration of the People's Commissariat of Internal
Affairs, had a share in the assassination of Kirov. When members
of the government came to Leningrad and summoned this Borisov
to the Smolny to interrogate him as a witness in connection with
the assassination of Kirov, Zaporozhetz, being alarmed by this

558

and fearing that Borisov would betray those who stood behind
Nikolayev, decided to kill Borisov. On Yagoda 's instructions~
Zaporozhetz so arran~ed it that an accident occurred to the automobile which took Borisov to the Smolnv. Borisov was killed in
the accident, and in this way they got rid of a dangerous witness.
I then understood the exceptional and unusual solicitude which
Yagoda had displayed when Medved, Zaporozhetz and the other
officials were arrested and brought to trial. I recalled that he had
entrusted the care of the families of Zaporozhetz and Medved to me
personally. I recalled that he had had them sent for detention to
the camp in an unusual way, not in the car for prisoners, but
in a special through car. Before sending them, he had Zaporozhetz and Medved brought to see him.
The danger of exposure was so evident to them and so real
that Yagoda decided to adopt more resolute measures. To put it
plainly, he decided to assassinate N. I. Yezhov. I know from
what Yagoda told me that in the summer of 1936 he instructed
other persons, not implicated in the present trial, to have poison
laid in the apartment in which Yezhov lived. How, when, by what
means and under what circumstances this was done he did not tell
me, and I do not know. But that it was done I am certain, because
I know that with Yagoda word and deed very rarely diverged.
When he was removed from his post as People's Commissar
of Internal Affairs, he directly set about laying poison in the office
and in those rooms which adjoined the office in the building of
the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs which Nikolai
Ivanovich Yezhov was to occupy. He instructed me personally
to prepare a poison, namely, to take mercury and to dissolve it
in acid. I know nothing about chemistry or medicine, and perhaps
I am mixing up terms, but I recall that he cautioned me againSt
sulphuric acid, against burns, odour and more of the same kind.
This was on September 28, 1936. I carried out these instructions
of Yagoda and made the solution. The spraying of the office which
Yezhov was to occupy and the adjoining rooms, the rugs, carpets
and curtains was done by Savolain en in the presence of Yagoda
and myself. This was on September 29. Yagoda told me that this
spraying must be done five, six or seven times, which was done.
Two or three times I prepared large flasks of this solution and
gave them to Savolainen. He did the spraying with a spray. I recall
that it was a large metallic cylinder with a large bulb. I know
this spray; it was kept in Yagoda 's dressing room; it was a foreignmade spray. The second and third spraying was done by Savolainen in my presence, the others in my absence. He told me about
everything, and reported to Yagoda.
I must also add that on September 28, when this conversation
took place, Yagoda took two ampoules from a small cupboard

559

where he kept a lot of various things, particularly phials, and
iave them to me; judging by their external appearance, they were
not of Russian manufacture. He said that these were poisons which
'Should be sprayed simultaneously with the mercury solution.
What it was, how it was called, I do not know. I gave it to Savolainen, who sprayed it together with the mercury solution.
That is all I did in connection with the attempt on the life of
Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhov.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us, please, was Yagoda interested in poi-sons generally?
BULANOV: Exceptionally.
VYSHINSKY: How was his special interest in poisons expressed?
BULANOV: He acquired this interest approximately in 1934.
I repeat, Citizen Procurator, that I can judge of this not only from
.conversations, but also from actions about which I knew. I know,
ior example, that he formed a very close acquaintanceship with
a number of chemists and gave direct instructions to build, or
rather to arrange, a chemical laboratory.
VYSHINSKY: What for?
BULANOV: It was always emphasized that it must be under
the control of Yagoda, as he had not in his arsenal a sufficient
number of poisons as means for definite ends.
VYSHINSKY: What ends?
BULANOV: This was later demonstrated in a very real way.
VYSHINSKY: That is?
BULANOV: For counter-revolutionary ends, for purposes of
assassination. I know that he employed a number of people on this
work. The setting up of this laboratory was an actual fact. I
know this because he ordered me personally to find proper premises and to hand them over to definite persons. This I did. I found
the premises and handed them over. It is true that I was never
there myself, but I heard from these people that everything was
done for the setting up of this laboratory. Yagoda warned me
that this matter was so important that the people mentioned must
be allowed unlimited funds and that no accounts were to be
demanded.
VYSHINSKY: Was this interest in poisons connected with
his conspiratorial actions and plans?
BULANOV: Quite definitely. During a private conversation,
when the coup d 't tat they were organizing was being discussed,
Yagoda said that for the achievement of this coup all means would
be required-armed action, provocation and even poisons. Because
there are times, as he put it, when one must act slowly and extremely cautiously, and there are times, as he said, when one
must act quickly and suddenly. The idea was that all means are

560

good means, and that there was no point in being squeamish in
the employment of means:
VYSHINSKY: And that poison might play an important part
in a coup?
BULANOV: As I recall it, he even said a "decisive" part.
VYSHINSKY: After Yagoda was removed from the post of
People's Commissar of Internal Affairs, did you remain working in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs?
BULANOV: Yes, I remained working there.
VYSHINSKY: And did you work there long?
BULANOV: Until my arrest.
VYSHINSKY: Approximately until when?
BULANOV: Until the end of March 1937.
VYSHINSKY: And when was Yagoda removed?
BULANOV: At the end of September 1936.
VYSHINSKY: Did the poisoning begin soon after Yagoda left?
BULANOV: The first spraying was done on September 29,
the second two or three days later, and the last, if my memory does
not betray me, in December. Six or seven sprayings were done in
all.
VYSHINSKY: Six or seven sprayings?
BULANOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And at which sprayings were you personally
present?
.
BULANOV: I recall exactly. It was the first, second, third
and the last. Four in all.
VYSHINSKY: And who did the in-between sprayings?
BULANOV: They were done by Savolainen.
VYSHINSKY: You knew about it?
BULANOV: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: And who instructed him?
BULAN OV: As I have already said, the first spraying was
done by Savolainen in the presence of Yagoda and myself.
VYSHINSKY: When was that?
BULANOV: I can say exactly, September 29.
VYSHINSKY: That is?
BULANOV: The day before Yagoda left.
VYSHINSKY: In addition to the dastardly preparations for the
poisoning of Nikolai lvanovich Yezhov, do you know of any
crimes of the same kind committed by Yagoda and yourself, or
by Yagoda alone?
BULANOV: Yes, I know quite definitely of the killing of
Menzhinsky, Alexei Maxirnovich Gorky and Maxim Alexeyevich
Peshkov.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us briefly about these cases.
BULANOV: The killing of A. M. Gorky was undertaken by
36

561

Yagoda as one of the effective measures for the creation of the conditions for success in case the coup came off. Yagoda said that when
the Rights became convinced that Alexei Maximovich not only
fully and entirely shared the policy of the Party and the government, but that he himself, with his usual enthusiasm, had joined
in the building of the Socialist state, when they saw, heard and
observed with what exceptional admiration Alexei Maximovich
on every occasion spoke about the role of Stalin in the building of the Socialist state. they came to the unanimous conclusion
that in the event of the success of the coup. Alexei Maximovich
would publicly raise his voice against them, and that, in view of
the prestige which Gorky enjoyed among all sections of the population in the Soviet Union and his exceptional significance in the
eyes of culturally thinking people abroad, this revolt-as Yagoda
put it-of Gorky's against the new power would be of exceptional consequences. They therefore decided to remove Gorky in good
time.
From Yagoda I learnt that Dr. Levin, Prof. Pletnev and Kryuchkov, Gorky's secretary, took part in this crime. I personally
several times heard Yagoda instructing Kryuchkov that he must
try to give Alexei Maximovich a chill, saying that, in view of
the condition of Gorky's lungs, a cold might result in complications, and as to the rest, everything required would be done by
Pletnev and Levin. As far as I know, Yagocia drew Levin into,
enlisted him in this affair, and in the cases of poisoning generally,
by taking advantage of some compromising material he had against
him (which, I do not know), and he also bribed Levin. For example,
I personally arranged for the country house about which Dr. Levin
spoke here. I personally, on Yagoda 's instructions, when Levin
was going abroad, several times gave Levin money in foreign
currency.
VYSHINSKY: By the way, do you remember how much you
gave him?
BULANOV: It was on two or three occasions, I hesitate to
say exactly, I think that Dr. Levin, who received the money, can
tell you more exactly than r, but it was something round about
81,000 on each occasion. I do not answer for the exact sum, but
it was round about that figure. On Yagoda 's instructions too, I
sent orders to the frontier that Dr. Levin should be allowed to
pass without customs inspection. And from what Yagoda told me,
Kryuchkov did not have to be persuaded particularly, because,
he said, Pyotr Petrovich was himself to some extent interested
as the literary heir-that is what I understood him to say-of
Alexei Maximovich Gorky. From what Yagoda told me, I know
that Kryuchkov acted accordingly, that on Yagoda 's insistence he
had Gorky brought to Moscow at, I believe, an unsuitable time of

562

the year with regard to weather conditions; and that on his arriving
here he directed him to his town apartment, where somebody was
down with the grippe, that is, to an atmosphere where, in view of
Alexei Maximovich 's weak state, he was most certain to catch the
grippe. And further, in treating him, as I have said, both Levin
and Pletnev, by means of deliberately wrong treatment, did their
job. That is all I know about the killing of Alexei Maximovich
Gorky.
VYSHINSKY: And was Menzhinsky killed on direct instructions, and whose?
BULANOV: On the instructions of Yagoda. And I must say
that if in the killing of Gorky the motives were, as he said, exclusively political, here I know from him that there were motives of
a personal kind.
VYSH1NSKY: That is?
BULANOV: The personal motives of a man who wanted by
any means, in any way, to make a career for himself, that is, to hasten
the vacation of a post, to make the post of Chairman of the 0.G.P.U.
vacant, considering, obviously, that in that case he, Yagoda.
would be the only candidate for the post of Chairman.
VYSHINSKY: That is your analysis?
BULANOV: Of course, political motives were also operative
here. It was more than of interest to the centre of the Rights, and
of the conspirators generally, to have their own man at the head
of the punitive organ, one of their leaders, that is, to create a
guarantee, the almost complete possibility of covering up any
tracks.
But Yagoda spoke to me personally about motives of a personal character as well. He several times dwelt on the fact that Menzhinsky had actually not been working for a long time, and that
he, Yagoda, had to do the work. He dotted the i's-in 1933, I
think it was-when he told me outright that he had decided to expedite it, that is, to put it plainly, to destroy Menzhinsky, that
he had put Dr. Levin on to this job, but that for some reason
Levin had not managed it. Then I learnt from him definitely
that he had enlisted Dr. Kazakov as the direct perpetrator.
VYSHINSKY: By the way, do you know whether Kazakov
visited Yagoda in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs,
in his offic~ on this matter?
BULANOV: If Yagoda said a while ago that he saw Kazakov
here for the first time, then I expect him to say now that he sees
me also for the first time in his life. Of course he saw Kazakov,
and saw him several times. For example, I personally remember
an occasion when Kazakov visited Yagoda in his office. This sticks
in my memory because it was a rest day. I cannot answer for the
date.
563

VYSHINSKY: Permit me to ask Kazakov. Accused Kazakov,
when was that?
KAZAKOV: On November 6.
VYSH I NSKY: What year?
KAZAKOV: 1933.
BULANOV: I distinctly remember that it was on a rest day.
We usually observed rest days, but on this day we were in the
office. That Yagoda saw Kazakov very often with Menzhinsky
is a fact. Kazakov used to visit Menzhinsky very often in his office.
VYSHINSKY: Kazakov used to visit Menzhinsky often in his
office?
BULANOV: Yes, very often.
VYSHINSKY: And Yagoda could not help seeing him?
BULANOV: Yes, Yagoda saw Kazakov several times in Menzhinsky's office.
VYSHINSKY: So Yagoda is not telling the truth here?
BULANOV: He is not. Where could I have got it from that
Yagoda told me that Dr. Kazakov had also been drawn into this
affair-the murder of Menzhinsky-and that he was doing it
together with Levin, that Kazakov was employing very intricate
drugs that were not only unknown to medicine, but not very well
known to Kazakov himself, so that to find any clues after this
poisoning would be difficult? This is what Yagoda told me. Where
else could I have got it from?
VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, did you hear Bulanov's testimony regarding the poisoning of Menzhinsky?
YAGODA: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: After this testimony, which establishes your
part in the poisoning, do you continue to deny it?
YAGODA: No, I confirm my part in it.
VYSHINSKY: You do confirm it?
YAGODA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bulanov, and was the killing of Maxim
Peshkov also Yagoda 's work?
BULANOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, what do you say to that?
YAGODA: I admit my part in the illness of Peshkov. I request the Court to hear this whole question in camera.
VYSHINSKY: I have no objections.
Accused Bulanov, you have drawn a monstrous picture here
of a number of crimes you committed under the direction of Yagoda.
Who else among the leaders of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" had a share in these crimes as far as you know?
BULANOV: Yagoda told me plainly that the decision to
poison Yezhov and to kill Gorky was adopted by Rykov, Bukharin ...
564

VYSHINSKY: And Yenukidze?
BULANOV: And Yenukidze, of course.
VYSHINSKY: In a word, the top leadership of the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites' '?
Accused Rykov, do you know that the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites'' adopted a decision to physically do away with Alexei
Ma.ximovich Gorky?
RYKOV: No.
VYSHINSKY: But what did you know about it?
RYKOV: I knew about the extremely hostile attitude towards Alexei Maximovich Gorky that had prevailed among the
Trotskyites and among certain circles of the Rights for several
years.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have a conversation with Yenukidze
at the end of 1935 on this subject?
RYKOV: With Yenukidze? Yes, I did.
VYSH INSKY: What about?
RYKOV: Yenukidze told me that the Trotskyites and Zinovievites were extremely concerned because of the influence which
Gorky was acquiring, and because he was a determined supporter
of Stalin and the general line of the Party. Therefore, as he put it,
they considered it necessary, in view of this significance of Gorky's-and his significance both abroad and in our country required no
confirmation-they insisted, as he phrased it, on putting an end
to Gorky's political activity.
VYSHINSKY: That is, Yenukidze spoke of the necessity
of putting an end to Gorky's political activity?
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: How, and in what sense?
RYKOV: He spoke in such a raised voice, or in such sharply
hostile expressions, that it was clear to me (inasmuch as it chiefly
came from the Trotskyite-Zinovievite part) that this tone concealed
the possibility of the employment of violent measures.
VYSHINSKY: From your conversation with Yenukidze you
concluded that it was a question of putting an end to the political
activities of Gorky by various methods, including violent measures?
RYKOV: Yes, going to that extent in case of need.
VYSHINSKY: And what does it mean, going to the extent of
adopting violent measures? May it also mean murder?
- RYKOV: Of course.
VYSHINSKY: So you knew that preparations for Gorky's
murder were being made?
·
RYKOV: Not exactly.
VYSHINSKY: You knew that preparations were being made?
RYKOV: I knew what I have already told you.
VYSHIN$KY; And is this not enough to qualify it as such?
565

RYKOV: For the qualification you are referring to, it is not
enough. Perhaps I underrated Yenukidze's words.
VYSHINSKY:· Underrated?
RYKOV: Perhaps I had no such conviction or opinion that
an attempt was being prepared on the life of Gorky. I had no such
conviction.
VYSHINSKY: But that such a problem might arise?
That is to say, in other words, could you gather from the conversation with Yenukidze that there might be no hesitation at the
murder of Gorky?
RYKOV: During this conversation with Yenukidze I spoke
quite vigorously against these attacks.
VYSHINSKY: You did, but I am asking about the bloc.
RYKOV: That is what I confessed to as one of the members
of the bloc.
VYSHINSKY: It is your affair whether you want to confess
or not.
RYKOV: I also spoke about my protest against this.
VYSHINSKY: Protest against what?
RYKOV: Against the tone, the expressions, the attacks which
Yenukidze used with reference to Gorky. Since it was at the stage
when the question could have come up only in this sense, I think
that my drastic intervention and determined protest excluded this
possibility.
VYSHINSKY: In order to avoid any further arguments about
this question, I formulate what you have just said in the following
words: first-in 1935 you had a conversation with Yenukidze
during which he said in sharp terms that the Trotskyite-Zinovievite bloc insisted on putting an end to Gorky's political activity.
RYKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Second-from the tone, from the hostile
manner, from the viciousness of this conversation it was possible
to gather that they would not stop at anything in order to put an
end to Gorky's political activity.
RYKOV: Now, after it has happened, it is quite clear.
VYSHINSKY: And how did vou picture it to yourself at the
time?
RYKOV: I said that I underrated this danger.
VYSHfNSKY: That would be a characterization of your attitude to the fact, but I am interested in the fact itself. You confirm that from the conversation with Yenukidze it was possible
t? gathe: ~hat, for the purpose of putting an end to Gorky's political activity, as he said, they would not stop at anything.
. R'\'.'KOV: I would simply say that they might not stop at takmg v1olent· measures.
·
J

566

VYSHINSKY: So. And, third-it was clear from this conversation with Yenukidze that it might be a question of a terror-·
ist act against Gorky?
RYKOV: Yes. The question could have been put that
way.
VYSHINSKY: It was clear. Be seated, please.
THE PRESIDENT (to Bulanov): Have you finished your
testimony?
BULANOV: I have.
VYSHINSKY: I have a question to put to Bulanov. Do you
know of any cases of Yagoda's sending money to Trotsky?
BULANOV: I know quite definitely.
VYSHINSKY: In what year?
BULANOV: It was not at once that I found out from Yagoda
that he was supplying Trotsky with money. In 1934 Yagoda called
me in and told me that a man would come to me to whom I was to
give $20,000.
·
VYSHINSKY: $20,000? For what purpose and for whom?
BULANOV: I never asked Yagoda why and for what purpose.
·
handed the money over to this man.
The next day, when I reported that I had executed the, order,
Yagoda told me that I would have to hand over to this man further sums of money which he would designate. At the same time
he said that this man was his direct contact with Trot&ky, that
Trotsky was lately very hard pressed fo~ money and that the sums
which I handed over to this man and which I would hand over to
him in the future were intended directly for Trotsky. As a matter
of fact, this man came about four or five times during the period of 1934-36, and each time I gave him money, of course on
Yagoda 's instructions ..
.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Have Counsel for Defence any questrons?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE: (Reply in the negative.) .
THE .PRESIDENT: Have the accused any questhms?.
RYKOV: Bulanov spoke here about my archives, which were
found in Yagoda 's possession. f. should like him fo tell .us about
what was found, where these archives came from, what their contents are and how he knows· about it.
BULANOV: If I knew exactly what they contained and the
dimensions of these archives, I would most certainly answe.r my
fellow-accused. Unfortunate,Iy, I have no such i11:formation at my
disposal. I spoke about these archives on the basis of the following.
When Yagoda. was moving to diffet;ent premises during the renovation of the building, r do not remember under what circumstances
it happened, but, at any rate, I found a pile of documents among
some of the things which had been lying for a long time _in ~he
. 567

safe. I asked Yagoda about it. He said: don't unpack them, these
are Rykov's archives. It seems to me that was sufficient ground
for me to make this statement.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for thirty minutes .

.

.

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Yagoda, do you confirm the testimony which you
gave during the preliminary investigation?
YAGODA: I do.
THE PRESIDENT: What do you wish to tell the Court about
your crimes?
YAGO DA: The beginning of my anti-Soviet activities dates
back to 1928, when I joined the anti-Soviet organization of the
Rights. This was preceded by conversations with Rykov, with
whom I maintained rather friendly personal relations.
The peculiarity of my position in the organization of the Rights
consisted mainly in the fact that I, as Assistant Chairman of the
United State Political Administration at that time, could not
take part in the open counter-revolutionary struggle of the Rights
and I was on a status of secrecy. This role of mine in the organization of the Rights was known to a few persons: Rykov, Bukharin, Uglanov, Smirnov A. P. (Foma), Tomsky. During the first
stage of the struggle of the Rights against the Soviet government
my role consisted in supplying the organization of the RightsRykov and Bukharin-with tendentiously selected confidential
material of the O.G.P.U., which they, Bukharin and Rykov,
used for their struggle against the Party.
Later on, when the Rights adopted illegal methods in their
struggle against the Party and the Soviet government, the centre
of the Rights entrusted me with the task of guarding the organization of the Rights against exposure. On the strength of this
understanding I took all measures, in the course of a number of
years, to guard the organization, particularly its centre, against
exposure. I must state here with full responsibility that it was my
treasonable work in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs
which must be blamed for the fact that it was not until the years
1937-38 that the Soviet government and the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs were able to uncover and liquidate the
counter-revolutionary activities of the organization of the Rights
and the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." Had the Soviet intelligence service been free of the counter-revolutionary groups of
Rights and spies who, thanks to me, occupied positions in the
apparatus of the Pei1ples Commissariat of Internal Affairs, the
568

conspiracy against the Soviet government would undoubtedly
have been uncovered at its inception.
I fully confess this guilt of mine before the Soviet Court.
At the same time the responsibility for all this must be shared
by those sitting here in the dock, Rykov and Bukharin in the first
place. In 1931, during the period when the illegal activities of the
Rights became intensified, when the task of guarding the organization against exposure became more urgent, the leaders of the
centre of the Rights demanded of me that I appoint active members
of the organization of the Rights to leading posts in the O.G.P.U.
r may cite as proof the concrete fact of the appointment of Molchanov, a member of the organization of the Rights, to the post
of Chief of the Secret Political Department, which was supposed
to carry on the struggle against the Right and Trotskyite organizations. In 1931 Tomsky invited me to his country house,
where, besides himself1 I found also Foma (Smirnov), and he told
me in very categorical terms that r must do this, which I did.
Molchanov was appointed Chief of the Secret Political Department
of the O.G.P.U. It was then that Tomsky informed me of the
plan of the Rights with regard to seizure of power and of the intended bloc of the Trotskyites and Zinovievites with the Rights.
It was in connection with- this proposition, mainly, I repeat, with
the ·object of directly safeguarding the organization against exposure, that they argued about the necessity of appointing_Molchanov, who was a member of this organization. During the same period, in· the years 1931-32, I set up in the apparatus of the
O.G.P.U. a group of Rights made up of O.G.P.U. officials.
Prokofyev, Molchanov, Mironov, Bulanov, Shanin and a number
of other officials belonged to this group. In 1932, in connection
with the general plan of the Rights to overthrow the Soviet government and to seize power, I established connections with
Yenukidze on Tomsky's instructions. These instructions were not
fortuitous. At that time the main idea of the Rights and the starting point in the activities of the organization was the stake on
a counter-revolutionary coup by means of seizing the Kremlin.
I consider it superfluous to explain to the Court here that the very
fact that the question was put this way was a result of the bankruptcy of the line for a mass insurrection, in the first place kulak
insurrections, which we could hope for to a certain extent during
the period of difficulties, that is to say, during the years 1930-31.
Towards the end of 1932, when the victory of the collective farm
system deprived us of our hopes for mass kulak insurrections, the
main stake became a so-called "palace coup." Hence, it is quite
clear that my role in the organization, the role of a man who
was occupying the post of Vice Chairman of the O.G.P.U.
and who had in his hands the technical means for effecting the
569

coup, that is to say, the Kremlin guard, military units, and so
forth, became the centre of attention. And that is precisely why,
on the instruetions of the centre of the Rights, I established connections with Yenukidze (at that time he occupied the post of
Secretary of the Central Executive Committee of the U .S.S. R. ),
who was one of those in charge of the conspiratorial activities of
the Rights.
[n the beginning of 1933 something happened w~ich introduced serious corrections to our plan. I am referrmg to the
fascists' coming to power in Germany. While up to that period
the main line of the Rights was based on the idea of a "palace
coup" by our own forces, now, starting with 1933, we began to
orientate ourselves on the fascist organization.
Before I answer the question as to what concretely the orientation on fascist Germany meant, r must state the following: when the so-called "palace coup" was discussed, we
had in mind to arrest, overthrow the leadership of the Soviet
government and of the Party, and, having overthrown the Soviet
government, to restore capitalist relations in the country-that
which Bukharin did not have the courage to state clearly and explicitly during the course of his interrogation. Did we stake on the
overthrow of the Soviet government? r answer this question in
the affirmative. What social and political order would we have
established in the country after the overthrow of Soviet power?
I answer this question as well in plain words-a capitalist order.
r am passing on to a concrete presentation of the facts of my
crimes. I established connections with Yenukidze at the end of
1931 or the beginning of 1932. Towards the end of 1932 I was meeting him regularly, and discussed with him on more than one
occasion the questions of the so-called "palace coup." From Yenukidze I learnt that a military conspiratorial organization had
been set up in the Kremlin and that it was ready to effect the coup
at any moment. From him I also learnt about the orientation on
German fascism, which came to power in 1933.
In 1933 the centre, the bloc of Trotskyites, Zinovievites and
Rights, was organized and took shape. I also found out that, through
Rykov, the bloc was connected with the Mensheviks and, through
Bukharin, with the Socialist-Revolutionaries. Yenukidze kept me
informed about the decisions of the centre. It was from him I learnt
that in January 1934 there were preparations for a coup d 'dat
entailing the arrest of the Seventeenth Congress of the Party,
which was then in session.
I am passing on to the treasonable activities of the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites" aqd its connections with foreign states.
570

In the first place, I must tell the Court that, under my protection,
a group of my followers, a group of spies of various foreign intelligence services, existed in the very apparatus of the O.G.P.U.,
and later in the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs. I knew
about the espionage activities of Zaporozhetz, Gai, Volovich,
Pauker, Vinetsky and others, but, having in mind the interests
of the conspiracy, I favoured their work, I considered them a valuable force in the realization of the conspiratorial plans, particularly along the lines of maintaining connections with foreign intelligence services. There is no doubt that through these spies
the foreign intelligence services were informed about my belonging
to the organization of the Rights and about my part in their organization. They were also well informed about the existence and
activities of the entire "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." I can
give the Court the facts corroborating this position at an in camera
session. It was precisely through one of these spies, it happened
to be Vinetsky, who occupied the post of inspector under Rykov
in the People's Commissariat of Communications, that the connections of the bloc, and of Rykov personally, with the foreign
centre of the Mensheviks, with Nikolayevsky, were arranged.
Besides this group of spies in the People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs, I was aware of other connections of the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites'' with foreign states. I am referring
to Karakhan, one of the participants in the conspiracy, about whose
connections I found out in 1935 .. Karakhan informed me of the
foreign political orientation of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, '' on whose instructions he, Karakhan, was carrying on negotiations with the German fascist circles. ''The Germans,'' Karakhan
told me, "will help the bloc to overthrow the Soviet power."
Karakhan told me that Trotsky had been conducting negotiations
with the Germans for a long time before that and that he had
"engaged himself" (I put this in quotation marks) too much,
since he had promised, in compensation for assistance in the
struggle against the Bolsheviks, a great deal more than was necessary. Trotsky had promised to give the Ukraine to the Germans
and the Maritime Region to japan. According to Karakhan, the
bloc instructed him to bargain with the Germans. "Of course,
we shall have to make some concessions," Karakhan said. Karakhan demanded that I give him information about the organization of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" all over the Union
for his forthcoming conversation with the fascist German circles.
I gave him this information about the organization. I know that
this meeting with leading fascists took place, and that an agreement was reached about assistance to be given by the Germans
to the anti-Soviet bloc, but I am not acquainted with the details of
the negotiations, I mean with the. details as to the price at which
571

this agreement was reached. At the in camera session I shall name
the persons whom be met.
I am passing on to the terrorist activities of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites, » and my own terrorist activities particularly.
Not with the object of mitigating my guilt to any extent, but
only in the interests of establishing the true state of affairs, I must
declare before the Court that the attempts made by some of the
accused in the present case to represent me as a professional
terrorist are essentially wrong. I cannot, nor have I the desire to,
disclaim any of the charges preferred against me with regard to
the terrorist acts committed, but I only want to emphasize that
not a single one of these acts was committed by me without instructions having been received from the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites." How is it to be explained that my name is the
first to be connected with these terrorist acts? This is explained
very simply: only by the special position I occupied in
the organization of the Rights; it is also explained by the fact
that f, as former People's Commissar of Internal Affairs, had at
my disposal more technical opportunities for carrying out the decisions of the centre than other members of the bloc had. The evidence given in Court has brought to light the facts about the terrorist acts which were committed. I want to dwell on the political
aspect of the question.
In the first place, the murder of Kirov. How did the matter
stand? In 1934, in the summer, Yenukidze informed me that the
centre of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" had adopted a decision to organize the assassination of Kirov. Rykov took a direct
part in the adoption of this decision. From this it became quite
clear to me that the Trotskyite-Zinovievite terrorist groups were
making definite preparations for this murder. Needless to say here,
r tried to object, I marshalled a series of arguments about this
terrorist act being inexpedient and unnecessary. I even argued
that I, as a person responsible for guarding the members of the
government, would be the first to be held responsible in case a terrorist act was committed against a member of the government.
Needless to say, my objections were not taken into consideration and had no effect. Yenukidze insisted that I was not to place
any obstacles in the way; the terrorist act, he said, would be carried out by the Trotskyite-Zinovievite group. Owing to this, I
was compelled to instruct Zaporozhetz, who occupied the post of
AssistantChiefofthe Regional Administration of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, not to place any obstacles in the way
Of the terrorist act against Kirov. Some time later Zaporozhetz informed me that the organs of the People's Commissariat of Internal
Affairs had detained Nikolayev, in whose possession a revolver
and a chart of the route Kirov u.5ually took had been found. Ni572

kolayev was released. Soon after that Kirov was assassinated
by this very Nikolayev. Thus I declare categorically that the
murder of Kirov was. carried out on the instructions of the centre
of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." It was also on the decision of this centre that terrorist acts were committed against
Kuibyshev, Menzhinsky and Gorky.
.
What was the situation here? Even before Kirov was assassinated, Gorky's son Maxim died. I have already stated before
the Court that I admit my part in causing Max's sickness,
and I again plead before the Court that my explanations with
regard to this ,matter be left for the in camera session of the Court.
VYSHINSKY: In this connection I have only one question.
Do you plead guilty to causing, as you express it, Peshkov 's sickness?
YAGO DA: I shall give all my explanations with regard to
this question at the in camera session of the Court.
VYSHINSKY: Very well. But do you plead guilty to Peshkov's
death?
YAGODA: I am speaking explicitly: I shall give all the explanations relating to this question in their entirety at the in camera
session of the Court.
VYSHINSKY: Do you plead guilty or do you not?
YAGO DA: Permit me not to answer this question.
THE PRESIDENT (to the Procurator): Have you any objections to this question about the death of Peshkov being referred
to the in camera session of the Court?
VYSHINSKY: I do not object, because I have in mind that
the results of this may be announced at an open session.
THE PRESIDENT: The Court has decided ·to satisfy the
request of the accused Yagoda, and the question of the death of
Peshkov will be taken up at the in camera session.
Accused Yagoda, proceed.
YAGO DA: Around that time the death of Menzhinsky was
brought about. I deny that in causing the death of Menzhinsky
I was guided by considerations of a personal nature. I aspired
to the post of head of the O.G.P.U. not out of personal considerations, not for careerist considerations, but in the interests
of our conspiratorial organization'. The decision of the centre on
this question was conveyed to me personally by Yenukidze. In
both of these cases we resorted to the services of physicians, which
meant complete guarantee in the sense that exposure was impossible.
· When Yenukidze conveyed to me the- decision of the contact
centre about the assassination of Kirov, I expressed my apprehension
that a direct terrorist act might expose not only myself, but the
whole organization as well. I pointed out to Yenukidze that there
was a less dangerous method and I reminded him, Yenukidze,
573

how Menzhinsky 's death was brought about with the help of
physicians. Yenukidze replied that the assassination of Kirov
must be 'carried out the way it was planned, that the Trotskyites
and Zinovievites took it upon themselves to commit this murder,
and that it was our business not to place any obstacles.
As for the safe method of causing death with the help of physicians, Yenukidze said that in the near future the centre would
discuss the question as to who exactly of the leaders of the Party
and the government should be the first to be done to death by this
method.
Indeed, some time later, during my next meeting with Yenukidze, he told me that the centre had decided to undertake a oomber of terrorist acts against members of the Political Bureau and,
in addition, against Maxim Gorky personally. The decision with
regard to Kuibyshev was clear to me, but I could not comprehend
the decision about committing a terrorist act against Gorky.
Yenukidze explained to me that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," considering that the overthrow of the Soviet government
was a prospect of the near future, regarded Gorky as a dangerous
figure. Gorky was a staunch supporter of Stalin's leadership,
and in case the conspiracy was carried into effect, he would undoubtedly raise his voice in protest against us, the conspirators.
Considering Gorky's immense prestige within the country and abroad,
the centre, according to Yenukidze, adopted a categorical decision
about Gorky being physically put out of the way.
In view of my categorical refusal, Yenukidze asked me to
send Levin to him. I did as I was told and, when Levin came back
from Yenukidie, I confirmed that this act was to be carried out.
Later on I spoke to Levin several times about this myself, and
at his suggestion I sent for Pletnev.
I declare that Rykov, Bukharin and the others sitting here
in the dock bear full responsibility for these terrorist acts. I declare
that these acts were committed on their decision. As to how it was
done, the physicians will tell you better than r.
I want to draw the attention of the Court to one more fact.
I mean the fact of the attempt of a group of the conspirators to
poison Yezhov.
When Yezhov was appointed People's Commissar of Internal
Affairs, it became quite clear that all the activity of our group
and also of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" would be uncovered. Yezhov had already begun to smash up the cadres of the
conspirators and, of course, might get at the centre of the bloc
and at me persona Uy.
And thus, in order to save our organization, in order to save
Rykov, Bukharin and the others, we decided to murder Yezhov.
The poisoning was done by Bulanov. He has told the Court about
574

it. I deny some parts of what he said, but that does not change
the facts and the essence of the thing.
I also do not deny the fact that at Yenukidze 's request I sent
money to Trotsky through Mirov-Abramov.
This is the information which I consider it necessary to place
before the Court.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you any questions, Comrade Procurator?
VYSHINSKY: Of course.
Hence, if we sum up your explanations, we may say the following:
First-that you plead guilty to the fact that your participation in the underground work of the Rights was of long standing.
YAGODA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Second-that you plead guilty to having
been one of the leaders of the underground "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites."
YAGODA: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: Third-that, together with this bloc, you
pursued the aim of overthrowing the Soviet government and
of restoring capitalism in the U .S.S. R.
YAGODA: Yes, I do. We set ourselves the task of seizing
the Kremlin.
VYSHINSKY: That for the purpose of overthrowing the government you chose the method of an insurrection timed primarily for the outbreak of war. Is that so?
YAGODA: No, it is not so. An armed insurrection-that
was nonsense. Only these babblers here could think of that.
VYSHINSKY: Well, what were you thinking of?
YAGODA: Of a "palace coup."
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, of a violent coup, carried thrnugh
by a small group of plotters?
YAGODA: Yes, the same as they did.
VYSHINSKY: Timing it preferably for a military onslaught
on the U.S.S.R. by foreign powers, or did you have various
plans?
, YAGODA: There was one plan, namely, to seize the Kremlin.
The time was of no importance.
VYSHINSKY: Was it your point of view that it was expedient in case of war to prepare and secure the defeat of the U.S.S. R.?
-. YA-OODA: That was the point of view of the bloc, and therefore it was mine too.
VYSHINSKY: Do you also admit being guilty of espionage
work?
YAGODA: No, I do not admit being guilty of this activity.

575

VYSHINSKY: But you yourself have said that several spies
were at work under your direct leadership.
YAGO DA: Yes, I admit that.
VYSHINSKY: Did you know they were spies?
YAGODA: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: Did you know they were fulfilling espion~ge
duties?
YAGODA: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: So you helped them?
YAGODA: I am just as responsible for these spies as
VYSHINSKY: Was Volovich a spy?
YAGODA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Are you responsible for Volovich?
YAGODA: just as Rykov is for Sharangovich.
VYSHINSKY: We shall deal with them separately. Now I am
speaking about you. Do you admit that a number of intelligence
service agents, German and Polish spies, were under your wing?
Is that so, or not?
YAGODA: It is.
VYSHfNSKY: Did you know of their espionage activity and
did you shield this espionage activity?
YAGODA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: I consider that since you shielded this espionage
activity, you helped them, assisted them.
YAGO DA: No, I do not admit being guilty of that. Had I been
a spy, I assure you that dozens of states would have been compelled
to disband their intelligence services.
VYSHINSKY: That would have been the affair of these states.
Was Volovich a spy?
YAGO DA: r said he was.
VYSH INS KY: Did you know of that?
YAGO DA: I did.
VYSHINSKY: You neither arrested nor shot him?
YAGODA: No.
VYSH INS KY: Were you in duty bound to arrest and shoot
spies you had discovered?
YAGODA: Obviously.
VYSHINSKY: So then you did not do that, that is to say, in
other words, you helped spies to act as spies.
YAGO DA: I shielded them.
VYSHINSKY: Did you help them?
YAGODA: I would have helped if I gathered materials together
and passed them on to them.
· VYSHINSKY: But were you aware that they passed materials
on?

YAGODA: Not always.
576

VYSHINSKY: But sometimes you were?
YAGO DA: I was.
VYSHINSKY: So they passed on materials to foreign intelligence services with your knowledge?
YAGODA: No.
VYSHINSKY: Were you informed that they passed on materials to foreign intelligence services?
YAGODA: Undoubtedly.
VYSHINSKY: Since you were informed of it, then it was with
your knowledge?
YAGO DA: With my connivance.
VYSHINSKY: Very well, with your connivance in what they
were doing, and of what you were aware. Is that established?
YAGODA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Do you also admit being guilty of having placed
state funds at Trotsky's disposal on the instructi'ons of the bloc?
YAGO DA: I do.
VYSHINSKY: And do you admit being guilty of organizing
and effecting terrorist acts: first-the murder of Comrade Kirov
on the orders and instructions of the bloc?
YAGODA: I admit being guilty of complicity in the murder.
VYSHINSKY: Do you admit being guilty of complicity in
the-murder or in causing the death of Menzhinsky?
. YAGO DA: I do.
VYSHfNSKV: Do you admit. being guilty of organizing the
murder of Kuibyshev?
YAGODA: I do.
VYSHINSKY: Do you admit being guilty of the ml!rder of
Alexei Maximovich Gorky?
y AGO DA: r do.
VYSHfNSKY: I have no more questions~
THE PRESIDENT: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: Does the accused
Yagoda confirm the testimony he gave at the preliminary i~vesti­
gation with reference to his meetings with Pletnev?
YAGODA: I said that.
KOMMODOV: ls the same trueJ as regarqs meetings with
Kazakov?
YAGO DA: I confirmed that.
KOMMODOV: I have no more questions.
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE BRAUDE:: Who conceived the
idea of death from disease?
YAGODA: I have said-Yenukidze.
BRAUDE: Allow me to.ask you, what metho~ didyou employ
to secure Levin's consent to commit these terrorist acts?·
YAGODA: In any case not such as ·µe described !1ere.
~

~7

BRAUDE: You yourself went into detail about this at the
preliminary investigation. Do you confirm this part of your
.
testimony?
YAGO DA: rt is exaggerated, but that doesn't matter.
BRAUDE: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the accused any questions to Yagoda?
RYKOV: I have the same question regarding the archives
about which Bulanov spoke.
YAGODA: I had no archives of Rykov's.
VYSHINSKY: I have a question to Bulanov. What archives
of Rykov's did you say were in Yagoda's keeping?
BULANOV: I spoke of that in my testimony to the Court.
I will repeat. When participating in a change of premises I
discovered a number of documents of a personal character, I
don't remember what they were. From them ·it was clear that
they were personal documents of Alexei Ivanovich Rykov. I asked
Yagoda, who confirmed this to me, but as to what was there,
and how much of it, I have said and say now that I do not
know.
YAGO DA: Allow me to put a question. Perhaps you will recall
·one document at least, and will say what it was?
BULANOV: Had f remembered, I would already have said.
YAGODA: Rather strange. He establishes that this was
Rykov's archive, but by what documents? just by the name,
or what?
BULANOV: In reply to that, I can only say one thing:- that
Yagoda at one time did not doubt for a single second my ability
to find my bearings and appraise things very rapidly in any circumstances. f don't know why he now denies a thing that is
unquestionably clear to me; I said what I knew and considered it
necessary to say so.
YAGO DA: In any case, had the archives really existed, in
comparison with the other crimesf the Rykov archives are a trifle.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Yagoda, tell the CDurt, did· you in
your criminal activities shield the Mensheviks?
YAGODA: The Mensheviks? In what period?
VYSHINSKY: In 1935, did you shield the underground criminal activities of the Mensheviks?
YAGO DA: According to my information, the Mensheviks did
not play a particularly active role.
VYSHINSKY: Did they play any r_ole at all?
YAGO DA: Almost none.
·
·
VYSHINSKY: That is·to say, they did11Iay some role?
YAGODA: The most insignificant. ·
VYSHINSKY: But in any case you shielded this, even very
insignificant rnle of the Mensheviks?- - ,
·518

YAGO DA: r shall not be able to give you art answer to this
question.
·
. VYSHINSKY: Allow me· to quote to Yagoda his testimony
in Vol. II, p. 135: "Question: You are shown a document from the
materials of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs,
containing a report on the Menshevik centre abroad and on its
active work in the U.S.S.R." Do you recall this fact?
YAGODA: Yes, I ·know, only I shall not be able to give you
an answer to this here.
VYSHJNSKY: I don't want you to answer. In November 1935
the following inscription ~was made on this document: "This
has long ceased to be a party and it is not worth bothering with
it." "Reply: Yes, l Wrote that inscription." And there follows
your explanation: "this is only one of the manifestations of the
· fact that I was . protecting t~e Mensheviks from discovery and
warding the blow off them, qecause they were in contact with
the Rights." Do you confi~m that?
YAGODA: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Hence the conclusion can be drawn from this
that the Rights were in contact with the Mensheviks in underground
conspiratorial. work~ and that you Were shielding this underground
conspiratorial work ·of theirs; and· warded blow after blow off
them? Is that right.?
YAGODA: Not quite.
VYSHINSKY: And what was the case? Do you confirm this
-·
testimony?
YAGODA: I confirm the testimony, but in 'order to explain
the situation to you, I must say something about this document.
VYSHINSKY: I know. Do you admit your testimony to be
correct?
YAGO DA: My testimony is correct.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, in your practical activities the
position was as you testified?
YAGO DA: rt was.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently in your practical activities you
protected the Mensheviks from discovery? Is that correct?
YAGO DA: It is.
VYSHINSKY: Now that is what I am asking you. Please
tell me now, what, according to your information, was the role of
the. · accused Rykov and Bukharin in causing the death of
Alexei Maximovich Gorky?
YAGODA: From Yenukidze I learnt that they had taken
part in a discussion of this question.
37•

579

VYSHINSKY: We have already cleared up this question as
recrards Rykov. He has admitted that in a conversation with Yenukidze they discussed the possibility of a terrorist act. I would
like to question Bukharin on this point.
BUKHARIN: I took no part whatsoever.
VYSHINSKY: I have not yet put any questions to you, and
you hasten to reply.
.
BUKHARIN: The words you said were "[ would like to
question Bukhariil on this point."
VYSHINSKY: I said I wanted to question _you on this point,
but I. h~ve not yet'pUt a question to you, and have already practically received a reply. ·
·
I wish to ask you, what was the attitude of Alexei Maximovich
to Trotsky?
BUKHARIN: A sharply negative one.
VYSHINSKY: And do you know what was Trotsky's attitude
towards Alexei MaXimovkh .Borky?
BUKHARIN: Also a sharply neg·auv·e one. Am I to speak of
this in greater detail?
VYSHINSKY: No, there is no need for tlrat just now. I would
like to question Bessonov. Accused Bessonov, do you confirm
that Trotsky's attitad-e to Alexei Maximovich Gorky was a sharply
negative one1
- -BESSON OV: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: On the basis of what facts?
BESSONOV: On the basis of what Trotsky said to me in a
personal conversation.
VYSHINSKY: Do you confirm your testimony in Court, to
·the effect that Trotsky conveyed through you the instructions
about the physical destruction of Gorky?
BESSONOV: Yes, [ passed on these instructions of Trotsky's
to Pyatakov.
VYSHINSKY: Trotsky selected Pyatakov as one of the ringleaders of the bloc? Is that so?
BESSONOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: You were connected with Pyatakov in underground conspiratorial work?
BESSONOV: Quite r-ight.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Bukharin, are ybit aware tbat this
ilostile attitude tO ·Gorky was adopted not only by Trotsky, but also
by the Trotskyites?
BUKHARIN~ Yes, of course, because Trntsky and the Trotskyites are one whole; the plotters obeyed in military fashion.
VYSHINSKY: Are yon aware that this negative attitude to
Gorky on the part of the Trotskyites was clearly expressed?
$1)

BUKHARIN: Are you asking· me about the conversation J· had
with Tomsky?
·
·
VYSHINSKY~ If it 1s· a proof -0f what we are dealing with.
BUKHARIN: I had one conversation with Tomsky.
·..
VYSHINSKY: Where and when did it take pface?
BUKHARIN: In 1935 Tomsky told me that Trotsky was preparing some hostile action or hostile act against Gorky.
VYSHINSKY: You learnt from To~sky that Trotsky was
p_reparing s-ome hostile act against Gorky and you did not ask
Tomsky what the source -0f his information was? :
BUKHARIN: No. I presume that he knew about u· from
the Trotskyite memb~rs of the bloc.
VYSHINSKY:. Did he not tell yo·u why the Trotskyites were
preparing this hostile action or act against Q~rky?.
BUKHARIN: He did not; he said that it was an action against
the "Stalinite Gorky" as a defender of Socialist construction in
general, and of Stalin's Party policy in particular. I think that
this referred to. the great resonance that every. word uttered by
Alexei Maximovich found on the internati.onai arena in general,
and among intellectua~s in particular. .
VYSHINSKY: Did not Tornsky. refer to this in connection
with the question of the overthrow of the Soviet _power?
BUKHARIN: No, Citizen Procurator.
VYSH IN SKY: Do you rem~mber this well?..
BUKHARIN: I remember it well.
VYSHINSKY: Allow me to remind you what Bukharin stated
at the preliminary investigation, Vol. V, p. 117: "The argument
that the Trotskyites put forward, Tomsky told me, in support
of their contention was that if the question of the overthrow at the
Stalin leadership was to be put seriously. one could not disregard
the circumstance that the Right and Trotskyite organization would
come up against an active and very irrfluerrtial adversary in the
person of A. M. Gorky. Tomsky told me that the Trotskyites
categorically insisted on their proppsai am;l that it was being
carried into effect."
BUKHARIN: You see, Citizen Procurator, since r was asked
what meaning r attached to these cu.rsory remarks of Tornsky, and
what impression this conversation Ieft with me, I related it in
greater detail, and this was my impression that I recalled when
I was asked about my conversation with Tomsky•.
VYSHINSKY: Tell me, did Tomsky link up 'the perpetration
of a hostile act against Gorky with the question· ~f the overthrow
of the Soviet government?
BUKHARIN: In essence he did.

58l

VYSHTNSKY: In essence he did?
BUKHARfN: Yes, I have answered.
VYSHfNSKY: I am interested in the essence.
BUKHARIN: But you are asking concretely ...
VYSHINSKY: Did your talk with Tomsky provide reason to
believe that the question of a hostile act against Alexei Maximovich Gorky was being linked up with the task of overthrowing
the Stalin leadership?
BUKHARIN: Yes, in e~sence this could be said.
VYSHINSKY: Consequently, you knew that some hostile act
against Gorky was under consideration?
BUKHARIN: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And what hostile act in your opinion was
referred to?
BUKHARIN: I gave no thought to the matter at all at that
time and I had no idea ...
VYSHINSKY: Tell us what you did think?
BUKHARIN: I hardly thought at all.
VYSHINSKY: But was it not a serious matter? The conversation was about what?
BUKHARIN: Permit .me to explain in a few words. 'Now,
post factum, now, during the investigation, I can say ..•
VYSHINSKY: Not during the investigation but during your
conversation with Tomsky.
BUKHARIN: But this was only a fleeting conversation, a conversation which took place during a·meeting of the Political Bureau
and tasted only a few seconds.
VYSHINSKY: I am not interested in how long this conversation lasted; you could have spoken to Tomsky for a whole
hour somewhere in a corner, therefore your arguments are of
no importance to me. What is important to me are the facts, and
these I want to establish. The facts are as follows: in 1935 (if
your statement at the preliminary investigation was correct). at
the beginning of 1935, a conversation took place between Tomsky
and you. Tomsky informed you that the Trotskyite-Zinovievite
part of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was contriving a hostile act directed against Gorky as against an ·adherent of the

Stalin leadership. Is this so?
BUKHARIN: It can be formulated that way.
VYSHINSKY: Is this a fact?
BUKHARIN: ·1t is a fact.
VYSHINSKY: What wa5 your appraisal of ibis information?
BUKHARIN: I took .no notice of this information.
.
VYSHINSKY: Took no notic.e?
Bt,JKHARIN: No.

VYSHINSKY: When a hostile' act is mentioned, one can
understand it to mean very serious hostne acts, even terrorist acts?
BUKHARIN: Yes. Between an artkle in the press, or an
unpleasant conversation, and a terrorist act the range: is very
great.
.
VYSHINSKY: And how did you regard this at the time?
BUKHARIN: I did not speak on the subject at all at that
time, there was nothing in my m_ind ....
VYSHINSKY: Why, was it such an insigrtificant statement that
it deserved no consideration?
BUKHARIN: It was a cursory remark. ...
VYSHINSKY: Even if it was cursory. You are told that
preparations are under way for a hostile act against Alexei Maximovich Gorky. . . .
BUKHARIN: It was approximately in the following way.
I treated it in a serious way during my interrogation because
I wanted to recall whether this conversation could not throw
some light on the material which the investigating authorities already had at their disposal, and :from the angle of this
material, everything took on a definite shape. But at that time
r did not have this in mind, r did not think about the meaning
of .this fact.
VYSHINSKY: It is not excluded that precisely at that time
the physical destruction, the murder, of Gorky was under consideration?
BUKHARIN: Now I consider that this cannot be excluded.
VYSHINSKY: That means, what Tomsky said gave ground
to think that it was a matter of a terrorist act against Gorky?
BUKHARIN: Now I affirm that this is so.
VYSHINSKY: But at that time you 'did not understand?
BUKHARIN: At that time I understo-0d absolutely ~othing.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): r have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT (to the accused): Has· any one questions-to
Yagoda?
RYKOV: Yagoda mentioned here the· name of Vii:ietsky a5 a
man who was my accompllce and through whOm. I maintained
connection with someone. r would, ask. hi_m to state where he got
this information an.ct who this .Vi_n~t-sky is.. Does Yagoda know of
this from Vinetsky himself .or from some other source? Personally,
I ·had no inspectors at rµy d~sposal~
YAGODA: Vinetsky was-inspector of communications_ in the
People's Commissariat of Communications and simultaneously
_inspector of CQmm1,micati ons in the. People's _Commissariat of
Internal Affairs. Qn one· occ~sion he ·called me -on .the 'phone

.5S3

and said that Rykov asked him to deliver a parcel abroad, to
Niko1ayevsky; he asked me whether he could accept it. I replied:
Talk it over with Rykov, if-he gives you the pa:rcel, take it. From
this I see that Vinetsky was the liaison man between Nikolayevsky and Rykov.
THE PRESIDENT {to Vyshinsky): Have you any more
questions?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: The Court _has_ no questions either.- Please
be seated:
.
We will now proceed to the e:~rnmination of the _'accused.Kryuchkov.
Accused Kryuchkov, inasmuc_h as you have already confirmed
the testimony given by you at the -preliminary investigation,
tell the Court briefly of your criminal deeds.
KRYUCHKOV: I have confirmed my testimony completely.
I treacherously murdered Maxim Gorky and his son, Maxim Peshkov.
I committed both murders on Yagoda 's instructions and under
the influence of his threats.
While ordering me to murder Maxim Peshko"v, Yagoda
informed me of the proposed coup d''etat and of his, Yagoda~s,
participation in it. By accepting this order I became a participant of the counter-revolutionary organization of the· Rights.
I cannot hide from the Court, as I have already testified at the
preliminary investigation, that my personal interests coincided,
were interwoven with the underlying political motive of this crime.
I do not wish to minimize the degree of my guilt by referring to
Yagoda. I set about undermining Maxim Gor.ky's health after
great hesitation. But in the death of Maxim Peshkov I was interested personally. I calculated that with the death of Maxim Peshkov I would become the only person close to Gorky, a person
who in the future might succeed to Gorky's lar"ge literary inheritance, which would provide me with means and an independent
position in the future.
I made Yagoda's acquaintance in 1928. We established a closer contact in 1931. In 1932 our meetings became more frequent. Yagoda often talked with me, we spoke of Alexei Maximovich, of his role as a political figure, of his proximity to the Party and Stalin. We spoke of the work which Maxim Peshkov was
doing for Alexei Maximovich. Yagoda also sounded out my
political views. I -did not believe in the forces of industrialization
of the country, I did not believe in the collectivization of the
country's agriculture.
_
In conversations with me in 1932, Yagoda often hinted to me
that he was aware ·of the. fact that I lived rather lavishly and
spent relatively ·large ·sums for .my personal needs .

.~84

VYSHI~SKY: ·Where did you gef the m~ans?

.
KRYUCHKOV: I embezzled large sums of money belonging to
Gorky, exploiting his full confidence in me. And it was precisely
this that made me in a certain way dependent on Yagoda. I was
afraid that he knew· of my embezzling money and committing
a felony. Yagoda began to use rp.y services in order to gain. access
to Gorky's home and become more intimate with Gorky. I helped
him in everything. ·
·
' In the course of one of our conversations, at the beginning
of 1933, Yagoda said that Alexei Maxirnovich might die
soon, that he was getting old and that after Alexei Maximovich's
death his son Max would be in charge of Gorky's literary heritage.
"But you are used," Yagoda said, "to an easy life, and you
will remain in the house in the role of a retainer." This remark
of Ya:goda 's embarrassed me and Yagoda noticed my embarrassment.
With this our conversation came to an end.
In. 1933, I think in the spring, as f have already testified today,
Yagoda again resumed this conversation. This time he bluntly
urged the removal, or, to be more exact, the murder of Maxim
Peshkov.
He spoke to me in the following way: "It is not Maxini
Peshkov that matters·, it is necessary to lessen Gorky's activity~
because it is in the way ·Of the 'big chiefs'-Rykov, Bukharin,
Kamenev, Zinoviev." The conversation took place in Yagoda 's
office. He als-0 spoke to me of the counter-revolutionary coup.
As far as I can remember his words, he spoke about a new government soon coming to power in the U.S.S.R., which would fully
correspond to my political tendencies. M. Gorky's activity was an
obstacle in the way of the coup d'etat, this activity must be lessened.
"You know how Alexei Maximovich loves his son Maxim; he derives great strength .from this love," he said.
I told him that I did not. intend to stand in his, Yagoda's,
way, and asked what I must do. ro this he replied: "Remove
Maxim' ',-and added that Maxim's death would affect Gorky
and turn him into a harmless old man. In the course of further conversation he said: "Your task is very simple; make Maxim drink
heavily. I have spoken with Dr. Vinogradov and I know what
fatal effect wine has -0n Maxim's constitution.''
· r was surprised that he had consulted Vinogradov on this
subject and gave expression to my surpris'e. He told me that
Dr. A. I. Vinogradov and Dr. Levin had been enlisted for this purpose.
_ I complied with his orders and set about preparing the murder
of Maxim Peshkov. I pegan to ply him witli liquors, receiving
lhem directly from Yagoda in fairly large quantities. But
nevertheless Maxim Peshkov's strong constitution would not give
~8~

way. And then in 1934 Yagoda kept hurrying me; he advised me to
get Maxim chilled. Yagoda said: "You should arrange somehow
to leave him lying in thE;! snow." In March or April, a short
time before Maxim Peshkov's critical illness, I did this, but Maxim
Peshkov got off with a light cold. On May 2, after getting Maxim
drunk, I left him to sleep for a few hours on a bench in the garden, as Dr. Levin testified here today. It was a cold day and
Maxim took ill and died on May 11. On the evening of May 3,
Maxim told me he was not feeling well; he took his temperature,
which proved to be 39.5, but notwithstanding this I did not summon a doctor. I advised him to warm himself up by drinking some
more vodka. Nurse Olympiada Dmitrievna Chertkova, a staunch
friend of the Gorky family, was greatly concerned and demanded
that a doctor be called immediately. I replied that it could wait
till the morning. The following morning I summoned Levin.
Levin arrived and stated that Maxim's ailment was a light form
of the grippe. He called me aside and said: ''You have achieved what
you were aiming at.'' I was a bit surprised by his words; how
did he leatn of my complicity in this crime? Previously .we
had had conversations regarding the state of health of Maxim
Alexeyevich Peshkov, but we had never spoken openly as one
criminal to another. A few days later, Dr. Badrnayev came by
chance to see Alexei M<:lximovich Gorky. Badrnayev examined Maxim Peshkov and immediately declared that he was
suffering from croupous pneumonia. - He asked in - surprise:
"But didn't Levin examine him?" When Maxim Peshkov learnt
that he was suffering from croupous pneumonia, he asked whether
A. D. Speransky, who often visited the Gorky family, could not
be summoned. Alexei Dmitrievich Speransky was not a practising physician, but Alexei Maximovich was very much attache~
to him and had high regard for him as a prominent scientist.
I informed Levin about this. Levin said: "Under no circumstances should Speransky be called." Levin -added that he would
soon come together with Dr. A. I. Vinogradov. Towards evening
he did arrive together with Vinogradov. Dr. Vinogradov, though
he had not yet seen the patient, brought some medicine with
him. I recall that there was some sort of clasb with Olympiada
Dmitrievna Chertkova when Vin9gradov gave Maxim some medicine without her knowledge; she was the one who always looked
after all patients in Gorky's house and demanded that everything
should go through her hands. And she administered some medicine taken from Gorky's family medicine chest.
. On May 7 or 8, Maxim Alexeyevich 's health improved. I reported _this to· Yagoda, who indignantly said: "Damn - it -all,
they are able to.._kill healthy people by their treatment, and here

586

they cannot do the trick on a sick man." I know that after this
Yagoda spoke to Dr. Vinogradov and Dr. Vinogradov proposed
that Maxim Peshkov be given champagne. Levin said that champagne would be very beneficial because the patient was· in a very
depressed state. Maxim Alexeyevich was given champagne, and
this caused indigestion accompanied by a high temperature.
When this indigestion began, Vinogradov personally-I know
this for sure-gave the patient a laxative, and upon leaving the
patient's room said: "Any layman knows that with such a high
temperature a laxative should not be given."
The medical consultation which was summoned at the insistence
of Alexei MaximovichGorky raised the question of applying blockade
treatment according to Speransky's method, but Dr. Vinogradov, Levin and Pletnev categorically objected to this and said
that a little more time should be allowed to pass. On the night
of May 10 when Maxim was actually dying, and when cyanosis
set in, it was decided to apply Speransky's blockade treatment
method, but Speransky himself said that it was already too late
and there was no sense in doing it.
. Thus, Maxim died on May 11. I have already testified that
f haq a personal interest in the killing of Maxim Peshkov.
Yagoda put the dagger in my hand. I killed Maxim on Yagoda 's
~n~tructions.

I forgot to add that when Yagoda spoke to me about the murder of Maxim Peshkov, he said: "Pyotr Petrovich, I can remove
you from Gorky in no time, you are in my hands. The slightest disloyal step on your part with regard to me will result in more than
unpleasant consequences for you."
. Having committed this crime, I was compelled to agree to
. a more horrible crime, to the murder of Gorky. Yagoda said
bluntly that I was to set about undermining Gorky's health. I
wavered; I tried to avoid carrying out this order. Yagoda
said that he would not stop. short of denouncing me as the
murderer. of Maxim Peshkov. And Yagoda gave me to understand in no ambiguous way that if I ever thought of bringing his name into it, nothing· would come of it. "The investigation will be conducted by my people," Yagoda remarked, and
I agreed to perform this etime. Levin explained in his testimony today how I made Gorky catch cold. In this case our actions
were co-ordinated; that is, I consulted Levin. Maxim Gorky spent
the wfoter of 1935-36 in Tesseli, in the ·crimea. I was· staying
in Moscow, but I visited him in the Crimea once every three weeks
or once a month: I arranged long walks for Alexei Maximovich,
I was always arranging bonfires. The smoke of the bonfire naturally affected Gorky's weak lungs. This time, in the period of

587

1935-36, Gorky did not recuperat~ in the Crimea; on the contrary,
he started on his return trip to Moscow tired out. Gorky's return
to Moscow was organized, or, to be more exaet, hastened by Yagoda,
who both with regard to the murder of Maxim Peshkov and with
regard to the murder of M. Gorky was always hurrying me on.
While in the Crimea, I spoke to Yagoda on t~ telephone. Yagoda
urged me to make haste; he said it was necessary to bring Gorky
back to Moscow, and this notwithstanding the fact that the weather
in the Crimea was very warm, while in Moscow it was cold. I spoke
to Gorky about returning to Moscow; he agreed and began preparations for the trip. Approximately on May 26, 1936, Nadezhda
Alexeyevna Peshkova, the widow of Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov,
informed us by telephone that we should not return under any
circumstances--the weather in Moscow was cold, and, besides,
Alexei Maximovich's granddaughters, i.e., her daughters, who
were in Moscow, were down with the grippe, accompanied by a
rather high fever. A day or two after this I again spoke to Yagoda
over the ~phone. Yagoda told me that the granddaughters were
perfectly well, they had recovered entirely, and it was necessary
to persuade Alexei Maxirnovich to return to Moscow. I told Alexei
Maximovich of this, and on May 26 or 27 we left for Moscow.
Immediately upon arriving in Moscow on May 31, Alexei Maximovich went to see his granddaughters, who were really down
with the grippe and had fever; and Gorky took sick on May 31.
Dr. Levin was summoned the same evening. Levin diagnosed
Gorky's ailment as a light form of the grippe, but on June 2 Alexei
Maximovich, in speaking to me in the morning, asked: "What do
the doctors say?" I replied: "The grippe." But he said: "In my
opinion, I am developing pneumonia; I see this by the sputum."
I then 'phoned Levin. Levin arrived and immediately agreed
with the diagnosis given by the patient. After this the "cure"
began. Gorky was treated by Professor Ptetnev and Dr. Levin.
I watched this treatment, and must say that the adrnin-istration
of digalen to Gorky produced a critical effectt about which the
Court possesses data. While prior to June 8, 1936, Gorky's
pulse was even and reached, I think, 130 a minute, after digalen
had been administered his pulse immediately showed sharp fluctuations.
This is my second horrible crime. That is all I have to say.
THE PRESIDENT: Has the Procurator any questions?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Have Counsel for Defence any questions?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: No.
-COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE BRAUDE: No.
THE PRE~I f?ENT: Have tqe accused any questions?
THE AC<:USED: (Reply in the negative.)
~

TI-iE. PRESIDENT: Have the medka1 experts any questions'?
COMMISSION OF EXPERTS: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: The Court is adjourned till 11 a.m.
March 9.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegi,um of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

589

A. BATNE~
Military Jurist First Rank

MORNING SESSION, March 9, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Pletnev, tell the Court about your crimes against
the Soviet power.
PLETNEV: In the summer of 1934 Dr. Levin told me that
Yagoda wanted to see me, saying at the same time that it was
not as a patient that he would apply to me. He did not say specifically what the subject of the conversation would be, so I did not
know exactly what it was about; but he did say that there were
differences of opinion inside the government, that there was a
certain amount of antagonism there, and that Yagoda would
probably speak to me on this subject. He did not mention
any names, surnames, or any concrete facts.
A few days later a car was sent for me and I was taken to Yagoda 's office. He started to speak to me on political subjects.
He said that a coup d'etat was maturing, and that he was taking
part in it; of other persons involved he mentioned only Yenukidze.
Some time later Levin told me that, besides Yenukidze,Rykov was
also involved in the anti-Soviet conspiracy. Yagoda said that he
and Yenukidze had decided to enlist me, in addition to Levin,
and that our assistance was required for the purpose of getting two
persons out of the way. These two persons were Maxim Gorky and
Kuibyshev. I objected. I said that, in the first place, Maxim Gorky
was a writer, and, in the second place, both were sick men whose
days, in fact, were numbered. Yagoda said: "They are sick but
very active, and it is not only a question of getting healthy
people out of the way, but also of reducing the duration and
the extent of the activity of these persons." He added that Maxim
Gorky's role was particularly great both within the country and
abroad. Hesaid that he selected me not onlyas a medical expert but
also because he knew of my anti-Soviet tendencies. He accompanied. his proposal with violent threats directed against me and
against my family. He said that he knew of my relations with
Dr. Nikitin. With regard to Dr. Nikitin I must say the following:
Dr. Nikitin was Lev Tolstoy's favourite physician. He travelled
with him,_stayed at his place in Yasnaya Polyana when he was sick,

590

went to the Crimea with him. Later on he worked irt the same
hospital where I worked. He approached me with a conversation
about a grouping which existed among the physicians. But I never
could consider Dr. Nikitin as a man of politics to any extent and,
as I stated during the investigation and as I reiterate now, I refused to carry on the conversation with him, and some time later
I learnt that a number of them had been exiled. Thus, I personally
am at a loss to say what was the substance of their activity,
except for these conversations. But I took no part whatever in the
so-called Nikitin affair. I visited Kuibyshev very seldom. Gorky
I visited together with Dr. Levin on occasions when Gorky was
se_riously ill. I was the consulting physician, Levin was Gorky's
·
family physician.
The plan of treatment was worked out by me together with
Levin, I am responsible for it as much as Levin. ·
.
I confirm what Levin stated here. Gorky's health was failing,
a fact that was then known to all physicians. It was corroborated
by the autopsy that Gorky lived with one-third of .his lungs; consequently, physical strain, any infection, might prove fatal. No
extraneous poisonous substances were . introduced, but he was
subjec'ted to a regime which was harmful for Gorky.
Dr. Levin stated quite correctly that during the treatment
we did not overstep -the permissible and possible doses. Yesterday Dr. Levin was asked · whether .he injected 30 to 40
ampoules of camphor at a time. This is not the limit, I once
ha.d occcasion, in treating an· old woman for croupous pneumonia, to inject a considerably larger amount of camphor50 ampoules. Since then 8 years have passed-she has been
coming to see me every year. Camphor disappears from the
system within 25 to 30 minutes. But this is not an absolute rule;
at the same time, wlrat may be a normal dose for Ivan may be too
much for Peter. The same maybe said about alcohol. For one, three
tumblers full are enough to make him intoxicated, while another
may easily cope with two bottles.
Quantitatively and qualitatively, all the rnedieines were permissible, but in the individual case of Gorky they were harmful.
Of course, this dose does not change the essence of this affair. A toxic
effect, a harmful effect, appeared because the limit of endurance
in. the case of Gorky was lower than in the case of other people.
As for the killing of Kuibyshev, Levin stated the facts quite
correctly. Owing to a very strained and very nerve-racking life
Kuibyshev lacked strength, he needed stimulants, in the form
of various hormones which were injected. They could not be
injected uninterruptedly in the course of 365 days a year; it was
necessary to· make ·intervals, but no interval.s were made. A corSQ.l

responding effect was also brought about by the cardiac medicines
which Levin prescribed.
As you see, my testimony coincides with Levin's testimony,
differing perhaps only in scme minor details; but minor details
do not decide the matter and I bear just as much responsibility
as he does.
Perhaps you wi B now permit me to answer the questions about
my origin, work and so forth, which were yesterday put to Levin
and which, apparently, wi 11 be put to me too.
VYSHINSKY: How do you describe your frame of mind·at
the time you were invited by Yagoda to conspire about the murder
of Kuibyshev and Gorky? Did you entertain anti-Soviet tendencies
at that time?
PLETNEV: I did.
VYSHINSKY: And did you disguise these tendencies?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: How?
PLETNEV: I said on many occasions that I fully supported
measures which the Soviet government introduced.
VYSHINSKY: But in reality?
PLETNEV: I was not Soviet-minded.
VYSHINSKY: Anti-Soviet?
.
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you camouflage yourself?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you engage in double-deali~
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you lie?
PLETNEY: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did you deceive?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Formulate briefly the particulars of the plan
which you drew up together with Levin for the killing of Alexei
Maximovich Gorky.
. PLETNEV: To tire out the organism and thus lower its power
of resistance.
VYSHINSKY: To the extent of ..•
PLETNEV: So that there would be no ... in a word, to lower
the power of resistance, to bring about a situation where the
organism can no longer resist.
VYSHINSKY: To lower it to the limit?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: To the lowest possible limit?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: To the lowest possible and endurable limit?
.~

PLETNEV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: To take advantage of this weakened state of
the organism-for what purpose?
PLETNEV: For bringing about a possible cold and the infection accompanying a cold.
VY.SHINSKY: That is to say, deliberately to bring about
a condition when some kind of illness would be inevitably
contracted?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: And to take advantage of the illness in order
to do what?
PLETNEV: In order to apply an incorrect method of treatment.
VY.SHINSKY: For what purpose?
PLETNEV: To bring about Gorky's death.
VY.SHINSKY: And that was your plan?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: And you carried it out?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: What did you do to Gorky's organism in
order to bring it to a state when it could not resist illness?
PLETNEV: The technique was e:A"plained here by Levin.
VY.SHINSKY: Did you support this plan?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: There was your opinion also in this affairdid it carry weight?
PLETNEV: Technically I could not foresee anything, but
I bear full responsibility for this.
VY.SHINSKY: Of course, you bear responsibility to the full
extent. But I am interested in another question now: how was
your actual participation expressed? Was it in the fact that you
together with Levin drew up this monstrous criminal plan? Do
I understand you right?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: In the fact that you, together with Levin,
carried this plan into effect? Do I understand you right?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: Did you, together with Levin, bring about
the monstrous result which you planned?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VY.SHINSKY: In the case of Valerian Vladimirovich Kuibyshev, did you also draw up with Levin the planofbringing about
his death?
PLETNEV: Yes, together with Levin.
VY.SHINSKY: And together with Levin you took care that
this plan was carried out?
38

593

f>LETNEV: In so far as Levin carried it out, it was a comrnon

pla~YSHINSKY: And why did Levin select you as his assistant

or as his chief-whatever you consider it to have been?
PLETNEV: We had frequent occasion to meet each other
at consultations in government circles.
VYSHINSKY: But it was not only you whom he met?
PLETNEV: I think he could answerthis question better than I.
VYSHINSKY: And what is your own opinion?
PLETNEV: Probably because of my anti-Soviet sentiments.
VYSHINSKY: Was he aware of them?
PLETNEV: Yes, he was.
VYSHINSKY: Did you know Levin long?
PLETNEV: About forty years.
VYSHINSKY: Since student days?
PLETNEV: A little later.
VYSHINSKY: And did he have any ground to think that
you would not betray him?
PLETNEV: I did not get you.
VYSHINSKY: You were not afraid that Levin might give
you away?
PLETNEV: I cannot s-ay that.
VYSHINSKY: Were you afraid or not?
PLETNEV: I answer for this affair all the same.
VYSHINSKY: But were you afraid that he would betray
you, or were you not?
PLETNEV: I gave no thought to this.
VYSHINSKY: That is clear. You accepted this plan sympathetically?
PLETNEV: I have already stated during the preliminary
investigation that there was a hard struggle on this point.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you not refuse to be implicated in
this criminal plan?
PLETNEV: There were threats on the part of Yagoda directed
against me.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you attach such serious importance
to Yagoda 's threats?
PLETNEV: After all, he was People's Commissar of Internal
Affairs.
VYSHINSKY: Well, and when he was People's Commissar
no longer, what restrained you then from coming to the appropriate bodies and performing your duty as a citizen?
PLETNEV: I considered the question finished, dead.
VYSHINSKY: Dead are your victims, but the question is
still alive.
PLETNEV: Now I see that it is alive.
594

VYSHINSKY: You were afraid of Yagoda when he was at
the head of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, but
there was a moment, which lasted more than a day and more
than a month, when Yagoda presented no danger to you, when he
had been removed from work in the People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs.
PLETNEV: I thought that I was through with the nightmare. . . .
VYSHINSKY: That you had covered up your traces, that
nobody knew anything about it.
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And that you could go on appearing in the
role of a medical light, while you were really a light in the bandit world. Is that so?
PLETNEV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the Counsel for Defence any questions?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: In your testimony,
accused Pletnev, there is a passage where you say that during the conversation with Yagoda, when you began to raise objections, he told you: "This proposal is not subject to discussion but
to be carried into effect . ., Was there such a passage?
PLETNEV: Yes.
KOMMODOV: Was there a case, during your meeting with
Yagoda, when Yagoda said that there was ccmpromising material
against you?
PLETNEV: He did not show it to me, but he spoke about
it.
VYSHINSKY (to Pletnev): And did you not ask him what
kind of material it was?
PLETNEV: No, I did not.
VYSHINSKY: But perhaps there was no material?
PLETNEV: From my point of view? I do not know to this
day.
VYSHINSKY: If you were a serious person you should have
asked him what material he had.
PLETNEV: I did not ask that. But my Cadet past . . .
VYSHINSKY: You are not the only one with a Cadet past;
what was it then that frightened you?
PLETNEV: The general situation.
VYSHINSKY: That is clear.
KOMMODOV: Did you entertain anti-Soviet sentiments?
PLETNEV: Yes, I said so.
KOMMODOV: You had reason to think that the bodies of
state security knew of your anti-Soviet sentiments?
38*

595

PLETNEV: Since I entertained such sentiments, there was
also a reason to suppose so.
KOMMODOV: Would your anti-Soviet sentiments be sufficient in themselves to prompt you to commit a crime in connection
with your work, if there had not been Yagoda 's instructions?
PLETNEV: Under no circumstances.
.
KOMMODOV: How many years have you practised medicine?
PLETNEV: I have forty years' standing of irreproachable
medical practice.
KOMMODOV: Did you spend these forty years as a practising
physician, or did you engage in scientific research work?
PLETNEV: I was a practising physician, I was a pedagogue,
I engaged in scientific research work, and was editor of one of
the leading medical journals in the U.S.S.R.
KOMMODOV: Did you write any scientific works?
PLETNEV: I wrote quite a number of scientific works.
KOMMODOV: I have no more questions.
VYSHINSKY (to Pletnev): How many years did you say was
your standing as a physician?
PLETNEV: Forty.
VYSHINSKY: You consider your standing as irreproachable?
PLETNEV: Yes, I do.
VYSHINSKY: Irreproachable?
PLETNEV: Yes, I think so. .
VYSHINSKY: During these forty years you have never committed any crime in connection with your profession?
PLETNEV: You are aware of one.
VYSHINSKY: I am asking you because you state that your
work for forty years was irreproachable.
PLETNEV: Yes, but since I denied that time . . .
VYSHINSKY: Do you think that the sentence in the case
which is well known to you, the case of an outrage which you
committed against a woman patient, is a blot on your reputation?
PLETNEV: The se1:1tence, yes. . . .
VYSHINSKY: Is that sentence a blot on your reputation or
not?
PLETNEV: It is.
VYSHINSKY: So there were moments of disgrace during
these forty years?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Did yo·u not plead guilty to anything?
. PLETNEV: I cannot say that I did not plead guilty to anythmg.
VYSHINSKY: So you did plead guilty to something?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Is this a blot on your reputation?
>

596

•

PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: So, during these forty years there were blots?
PLETNEV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the other accused any questions?
THE ACCUSED: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRES ID ENT: Have the members of the Commission of
Experts any questions?
COMMISSION OF EXPERTS: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT (to Pletnev): Please be seated.
Accused Kazakov, do you confirm your testimony given at
the preliminary· investigation?
KAZAKOV: I do.
THE PRESIDENT: Tell the Court about your criminal activities.
KAZAKOV: My crimes are connected in ·particular with the
murder of Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky. My relations
with Menzhinsky may be divided into two periods. The first period, up to November 1933, during which I gave him proper treatment and achieved definite results. The second period, when
I applied a wrong method of treatment; that was after my meeting with Lev.in and after my meeting with Yagoda. Menzhinsky
had been in a serious condition before my meetings with them,
and had not quit his bed for six or seven months. I was called in
to treat a very sick man. He suffered from angina pectoris and
at the same time from bronchial asthma. He suffered from the
attacks of bronchial asthma particularly during the nights. As
for the attacks of angina pectoris, they came on periodically, now
stronger, now weaker, after the attack which he had suffered in
1926, finally culminating in a serious case of infarction of the
myocardium, as corroborated by the electro-tardiogram which
is to be found in the files.
The electro-cardiogram showed the presence of thrombosis of
one of the branches of the arteria coronaria.
After he had taken treatment with me in April 1932, Vyacheslav
Rudolfovich recovered and returned to work again. Levin spoke
about this yesterday, and this was set down in a statement bearing
my signature, the signature of Dr. Levin: and of another professor
in the office of Vyacheslav Rudolfovich, and the statement verifying
that he could resume work was submitted to the higher bodies.
While Vyacheslav Rudolfovich was under my observation I noticed certain peculiarities in. Dr. Levin's behaviour towards me.
First of all, his disparaging attitude towards me. I was being
discredited and at the end of November 1932 I was for some reason removed as physician to Menzhinsky when he was feeling well.
Gln March 5, 1933, I was again summoned to Menzhi nsky and found

597

him in a grave condition. After he had been down with the grippe
he developed chronio-sepsis. Attacks of asthma were followed by
attacks of angina pectoris. At that time I disagreed with Dr.
Levin with regard to Menzhinsky's condition. I was removed
from my work of treating Menzhinsky. I met Levin in May and
he expressed a certain amount of sympathy with me in connection
with the negative attitude towards me of a group of physicians
with whom I was carrying on a scientific controversy, and he
said that I was fussing over Menzhinsky to no purpose, that nothi rrg would come of it and that I would not make a career through
him. Then he said: "Well, we'll talk it over some other time."
I met him again in June. I learnt that during that ti me there
had been a medical consultation on Menzhinsky's case and that
the consultation found that Menzhinsky was suffering from chronio-sepsis and had adopted an anti-septic course of treatment with
lysates. The meeting with Levin and the conversation that ensued
were a surprise to me, because formerly he considered it unnecessary to continue this method of treatment in the case of Menzhinsky. I began to give treatment to Menzhinsky on June 19. At the
end of July Menzhinsky was again able to resume work. We spent
August and September together in Kislovodsk. While there, Menzhinsky was in good health. In October he again resumed work.
At the end of October I met Dr. Levin and this time we had
a frank conversation, the one which Dr. Levin corroborated yesterday. He said to me: "I am surprised that you have undertaken
Menzhinsky's treatment with so much zeal and that you are improving his health. You should not have allowed him to get back
to work. It is to no purpose that you are fussing about with this
living corpse. By this you are only irritating Yagoda and it will
lead you to no good." I was quite dumbfounded by this. Levin
continued: "You must realize that Menzhin~ky is in Yagoda 's
way, and that Yagoda is interested in getting him out of the way
as fast as possible. I am warning you that if you will tell Menzhinsky about it, Yagoda will, of course, destroy you, and you
will not escape Yagoda, no matter where you hide yourself. Yagoda
is a man who does not stop at anything and who forgets nothing.
I am vvarning you that Yagoda will summon you."
This conversation, for its frankness, exceeded all bounds. Of
course, it was my duty to inform somebody of this immediately, but I did not do it because I thought that this was some kind
of provocation on the part of Dr. Levin and I decided to wait and
find out what Yagoda would say to me. Dr. Levin belonged to
the group of physicians with whom I was carrying on a definite
controversy; I was not on good terms with him and I had no reason to trust him particularly.
Events developed. For a time I stopped treating Menzhi nsky.

598

The fact of the matter was, and you ought to know it, that I could
not visit Menzhinsky as simply as Levin did. I could go there
only if I was taken by a car with a definite pass, that meant a
car belonging to the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs.
If no car was sent for me I could not go to visit Menzhinsky. Indeed, for about fifteen days, perhaps a little longer, I did not see
Menzhinsky at that time, but I knew that he was at work. On
November 6-1 remember it exactly-the chief of the Medical
Service of the 0.G.P. U., with whom I usually went, came for
me in a car, and, unexpectedly for me, I was taken not to Shestie
Gorki, where I usually went, but to a newly decorated house in
one of the Meshchanskaya streets. When we came into this oriestorey house we literally suffocated. A heavy stifling odour. We
could clearly discern the odour of turpentine, but there was also
the odour of some other substance. Members of Menzhinsky's
family explained it to me this way: on November 5, that is to
say the day before, Menzhinsky's family and he himself were
transferred here. The house had been repainted and, inasmuch
as in the autumn paint takes a long time to dry, some substance
was added to the paint, a siccative, to make it dry faster. It must
be said that this siccative had a very pungent odour. We, healthy
people, were literally gasping for breath. You can imagine what
was Menzhinsky's condition, suffering as he was from bronchial
asthma! When I entered Menzhinsky's room, I found him in a
forced sitting posture, he spoke with difficulty; during the night
he had become all swollen-. I listened to his lungs-everywhere
there was distinct, typically asthmatic, dry crepitation, prolonged exhalation, laboured breathing. I and the chauffeur put
him on a chair and together carried him to the veranda and
opened all the windows immediately. Before carrying him out
I made an injection in order to give him some relief from a very
serious attack of bronchial asthma. I kept Menzhinsky for about
three hours on the veranda. After that we carried him back into
the room. I went home. While I was at home the telephone rang,
and I was told that they were speaking from Yagoda's, that I was
asked to come there and that a car would be sent for me at once.
Indeed, soon another car came for me and drove me to the first
entrance. I went up and met Yagoda, which fact he corroborated
here yesterday during the evening session.
Here the following conversation took place: at first he spoke
calmly and courteously, he asked: "Tell me, please. did you see
Vyachesla v Rudo lfovich?''
"Yes, I saw him today."
"What condition did you find him in?"
"In a very serious condition."
After a short interval Yagoda said:
~99

"Properly speaking. everybody has given up Menzhinsky."
I was somewhat surprised by this. Then Yagoda said to me:
"Tell me, please, have you spoken to Levin?"
"Yes, I have."
"In that case," he said (here he went beyond the bounds of
common elementary courtesy and I saw before me a real unrestrained satrap), ''what are you fiddling about, why don't you
act? Who asked you to butt in into somebody else's affairs?"
Here I understood that he was a participant in some affair,
that he knew what had happened about three or four hours before
that. I asked Yagoda: "What do you want of me?" Yagoda said
that I must work out together with Dr. Levin a method of treatment whereby we would bring about a quick end to Menzhinsky's
useless life, which was in the way of many people. "I warn you,"
he said, "that if you make any attempt to disobey me I shall
find means of dealing with you. You cannot escape me." If the
Procurator would ask me now whether I know Yagoda, I'd answer
that I know him. If the Procurator would ask whether I recognize
Yagoda, I would say that I do not, that is to say, there is a great
difference between the Yagoda I met then and the Yagoda sitting here. Now he is very modest, quiet, but there he was quite·
different.
I realized that I was caught in a terrible vice. I was thinking
how to get out of the situation. Two days later I saw Vyacheslav
Rudolfovich. It was November 8. At that time Vyacheslav Rudolfovich had developed a complication in his kidneys. I suggested that Dr. Levin and some urologists should be summoned,
because that was not my speciality. Perhaps I should have intervened, because I knew Vyacheslav Rudolfovich very well. Perhaps
it was possible to give him quick medical aid, but I did not do
it. True, Vyacheslav Rudolfovich spoke to me in his usual, very
gentle manner, and told me that his sister had been brought back
from Stockholm in a very grave condition, suffering from disseminated cancer, that she was now in the Kremlin and experiencing
painful vomi tings, owing to a disease following treatment with rays.
She had undergone vigorous treatment with radium and X-rays, but
all to no purpose, and she was practically in a state of coma. He
said that although he knew that it was quite useless, still he asked
me to look after Ludrnila Rudolfovna. I went to the Kremlin
and visited Ludmila Rudolfovna every day until she died. Incidentally, I must say that Vera Rudolfovna, who was then irt a
serious state owing to this calamity, also applied to me with a
request to help her, and I gave her immediate assistance.
At the end of November I met Levin and together with him
we worked out a method which consisted in the following: first
of all we took advantage of two main properties of albumen and
()OO

albumenous products. First: the f products of the hydrolytic
decomposition of albumen possess the property of stimulating the
effect of medicines. Second: lysates increase the sensitivity of
-the organism. These two properties were taken advantage of.
Thirdly, advantage was taken of the peculiarities of Menzhinsky's organism, of the combination of bronchial asthma and angina pectoris. It is a well-known fact that in a case of bronchial
asthma the so-called parasympathetic section of the vegetative
nervous system is excited. Therefore, in cases of bronchial asthma
substances are prescribed which excite the contrasting section,
that is to say, the sympathetic, the thyroid gland. Such a preparation
is the extract of the suprarenal gland, a preparation of the medullar
stratum.
In case of angina pectoris it is·just the sympathetic section
which starts from the subjugular plexus of the sympathetic ganglion that is excited. That was the fine point which was taken
advantage of.
If you should ask me whether it was necessary to give Menzhinsky sympathicotropous preparations, I must say-yes, if there
were only bronchia 1 asthma; but it should not have been given,
because he also suffered from angina pectoris. Only an ignoramus
could permit the administering of preparations of the medullar
stratum of the supraren:al gland when there was a .combination of
the two illnesses.
VYSHINSKY: An ignoramus or .. ?
KAZAKOV: Or with a deliberate purpose.
VYSHINSKY: With a criminal purpose?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Perhaps this was a case of both ignorance and
cri mi na 1 intent?
KAZAKOV: No, it was crime pure and simple. Gradually
one set of preparations was introduced, while another was put
aside. Therefore I do not know whether the preparations in themselves could produce the effect which they were supposed to produce. It was necessary to introduce a number of heart stimulantsdigitalis, adonis, strophanthus, which stimulated the activity
of the heart. These medicines were administered in the following
order. First, lysates were administered, then there was an interval
in the treatment with lysates, then heart stimulants were administered. As a result of this sort of "treatment'"a thorough weakening was brought about, and Menzhinsky died during the night
of May 10.
·
I know, you will ask me why I.did not inform the Soviet bodies of this crime. Yagoda kept me under strict observation. I knew
this, I felt this.
You will probably ask me what my motives were for keeping

601

silent. I must say they were motives of base fear. Yagoda occupied
a high position. And another factor-most of the physicians in
the Medical Service were my scientific opponents. I thought that
a time might come perhaps when I would be able to work freely,
that Yagoda would perhaps be able to curb them.
VYSHINSKY: As a compensation for your crime?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Thus you say that you were moved by considerations of a purely careerist nature. Medical science was against
you and you figured that you would get your opponents out of your
way.
KAZAKOV: That is to say, to neutralize them and get an opportunity to work freely, or to check them.
VYSHINSKY: And then·you would carry on your scientific
work?
KAZAKOV: That is to say, I would work freely.
VYSHINSKY: And did you not work freely before that?
KAZAKOV: At that period I was labouring under a strong
sense of injury.
VYSHINSKY: That was your personal feeling, because the
importance of your scientific work was questioned. But I am asking
you: did the State provide you with every possibility for your scientific work? .
KAZAKOV: The State provided for me fully, but the environment . . .
VYSHINSKY: Wait a moment. Did the Soviet state give you
an institute?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: A large or a small one?
KAZAKOV: The best institute in the Union.
VYSHINSKY: So how dare you say that you had no opportunity to work freely?
KAZAKOV: But to publish my works . . .
VYSHINSKY: The government cannot order your works to
be published, you understand this yourself. I am asking you, were
you given an institute?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: The best in the Union?
KAZAKOV: The best.
VYSHINSKY: Were you given assistants?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: Were you given means?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: What means were you given?
KAZAK OV: Large.
VYSHINSKY: Large, tremendous. So how dare you say

602

what you have just said? Do you mean to engage in slander even
here? Proceed with your explanations.
KAZAKOV: There were moments when I went through trying
personal experiences. Indeed, I must say that at congresses I
was not even given the opportunity to make my concluding remarks.
According to the agenda I was to read a paper, there are many
here present who know about it;· and I was not allowed to make
my concluding remarks, something that happened the first time
in the history of medicine. All my opponents spoke against me,
but I was not allowed to make a speech in reply to the discussion.
VYSHINSKY: You have quite definitely gone down in the
history of medicine by your monstrous crimes, therefore speak
of the crimes.
KAZAKOV: Now I stand before the Court and I find no justification for:myself. Fo(me it is a nightmare which has been haunting me these four years. For four years I tried to work as honestly
as I did before.
VYSHINSKY: When?
KAZAKOV: Before this crime and after this crime. I tried to
work to contribute the maximum I could to science, but this nightmare was haunting me and I have been waiting for the occasion
when I could rid myself of it. The Court now represents the occasion for me when I can speak out honestly about all that happened
and, first of all, when I can obtain inner relief from the conscious·
ness of the crime which I committed.
VYSHINSKY: Tell us please about your formula No. 2, by
which you killed Menzhinsky.
KAZAKOV: Formula No. 2?
VYSHINSKY: About that lysate of the liver.
KAZAKOV: The lysate of the liver is necessary in case of bronchial asthma, in case of angina pectoris . . .
VYSHINSKY: The lysate of the thyroid gland?
KAZAKOV: Is necessary in case of bronchial asthma and is
contraindicated in the case of angina pectoris.
VYSHINSKY: Did you apply it?
KAZAKOV: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: In an increased dose?
KAZAKOV: No, in a small dose.
VYSHINSKY: But larger than a usual dose?
KAZAKOV: Not larger, but it is absolutely contraindicated in
a case of angina pectoris.
VYSHINSKY: And hypophysis lysate?
KAZAKOV: Contraindicated in the case of angina pectoris.
VYSHINSKY: And lysate of the medullar stratum of the suprarenal gland?
KAZAKOV: Contraindicated.
(iQ0

VYSHINSKY: For what purposes did you employ these lysates?
KAZAKOV: For criminal purposes.
VYSHINSKY: For purposes of murder?
KAZAKOV: Yes, yes.
VYSHINSKY: Who checked your prescriptions?
KAZAKOV: Nobody.
VYSHINSKY: Instead of lysate of thyroid gland, you could
have given something neutral for angina pectoris and have drawn
matters out and fooled Yagoda. You could have said to Yagoda:
"You demand of me that I kill him. Very well, I shall kill him,"
but you could have made up your prescriptions in such a way as
not to harm the patient. Could you have done that?
KAZAKOV: I could, but another check was kept on me.
VYSHINSKY: Did you say that there was no check on these
lysates?
.
KAZAKOV: There was none on these lysates.
VYSHINSKY: I ask the Commission of Experts to answer
the following question: was there any check on Kazakov's lysates?
Or could he have given anything he wanted? I ask the Commission
of Experts also to answer the question as to whether these three
lysates played a role in the poisoning of Menzhinsky. If you now
pretend to be a repentant sinner, then tell us honestly, if you possess any remnants of honesty, tell the Court what prevented you
fooling the satrap, as you expressed it, and giving the patient
a neutral composition?
KAZAKOV: I must say, as I testified at the preliminary investigation, that lysates by themselves could not produce such
an effect.
VYSHINSKY: No, you are avoiding an answer. Tell us of
the three lysates: of thyroid, hypophysis and of the medullar stratum
of the suprarenal gland. Did these three lysates play a serious
role? By the way, I ask the Commission of Experts to answer the
question as to whether these three lysates played a role in the
criminal poisoning of Menzhinsky. I ask Kazakov to answer: what
prevented you placing neutral elements in these three lysates?
Did anybody prevent you, did anybody understand what you were
doing there in your witches' cauldron?
·
·
KAZAKOV: I had no witches' cauldron.
VYSHINSKY: So we see now, but can you·answer why you
did not withdraw these elements? Could anybody check on you?
Yes or no?
·
·
· ·
KAZAKOV: I think not.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Has the Counsel for Defence any questions?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: Tell me, what

604

was the date of your last meeting with Levin when he told you
absolutely clearly and exactly what results Yagoda wanted of you
concerning your decision in respect to Comrade Menzhinsky?
KAZAKOV: I don't remember the exact date, it was around
October 20.
KOMMODOV: When, after this, did you see Yagoda in his
office?
KAZAKOV: I saw Yagoda on November 6.
KOMMODOV: When did you visit Menzhinsky, not in Gorki,
but here at the house on Meshchanskaya Street?.
KAZAKOV: November 6.
KOMMODOV: Prior to the meeting with Yagoda?
KAZAKOV: Prior to the meeting with Yagoda and after the
meeting of November 8.
KOMMODOV: But before November 8, were you at Menzhinsky's place prior to going to Yagoda?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
KOMMODOV: When did you air out the room?
KAZAKOV: That was prfor to the meeting with Yagoda.
KOMMODOV: At your. meeting with Yagoda in November
1933 did he demand a definit~ method of treatment or definite
results?
KAZAKOV: He demanded such a method of treatment as
would accelerate the death of Menzhinsky.
KOMMODOV: As you understand it, what did Yagoda want?
KAZAKOV: Yagoda wanted fo be rid of Menzhinsky as so.on
as possible.
KOMMODOV: The death of Menzhinsky as soon as possible,
and you agreed to act precisely in this direction?
KAZAKOV: Yes.
KOMMODOV: How soon after your conversation with Yagoda
did the death of Menzhinsky take place?
.
KAZAKOV: In six months. This conversation took place on
November 6, 1933, and death to'6k place· on May 10, 1934.
KOMMODOV: After your meeting with Yagod·a did you have
occasion to meet Levin or were yOll alone in applying the method
of treatment?
KAZAKOV: No, I met Levin on ·neutral ground. Levin visited Menzhinsky's place more frequently, and did so without me,
too. There were intervals in the treatment· I gave. When· Levin
was there, I rarely met him.
VYSHINSKY (to Kazakov): In reply to the question of. Counsel for Defence Kommodov, you said that Yagoda was not concerned
as to how you "treated" Menihinsky, all he wanted was the result,
that is, death.
605

KAZAKOV: Yagoda kept a watch on me through Levin.
VYSHINSKY: Did Levin keep a check on your lysates?
KAZAKOV: No, he did not, but he ascertained Menzhinsky's
condition and on this basis kept a check on the fulfilment of
our criminal plan.
VYSHINSKY (to the Court): Allow me to put a question to
Levin on this point.
LPNIN: I could not keep a check on the lysates because I never
believed in Kazakov's method of treatment.
VYSHINSKY: Why did you not believe in this method; did
you consider it to be quackery?
LEVIN: I consider it to be adventurism. Nobody knew how
Kazakov prepared the lysates.
VYSHINSKY: Could a check have been made on them?
LEVIN: With great difficulty. He always arrived with his
bagland there were some sort of ampoules in it.
VYSHINSKY: Did you consider Kazakov's treatment to be
out and out quackery?
LEVIN: In my opinion it is adventurism. As to his reference
to a struggle against a certain group . . .
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you about that. Can it be said
to be quackery?
LEVIN: It was adventurism.
VYSHINSKY: Is this method useless for purposes of treatment?
LEVIN: Dr. Kazakov considered that there were no incurable
diseases, he made a mockery of doctors who say that . . .
VYSHINSKY: That's another question. I ask you, was this
method useless for purposes of treatment?
LEVIN: In some cases lysates helped, but if they were prepared
in a laboratory.
VYSHINSKY: And if he wished to prepare them badly?
LEVIN: He had all the possibilities for doing so.
VYSHINSKY: There was no check at all?
LEVIN: No.
Allow me to detain you for just another minute. I wish to
refute, as I did yesterday, the statement of Kazakov about his
talk with me in May and June regarding Menzhinsky. He is simply confused, he is not telling the truth. He said here that I had
stated: "Why are you bothering with such a corpse?" This is
shocking. I could not have uttered such words.
VYSHINSKY: That is to say, you could not have uttered such
words, they were too shocking, but you could do such shocking
things. Were these shocking things?
LEVIN: Shocking things.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Kazakov, I ask you: could you have
606

fooled Yagoda in this affair, that is, presented the matter as though
you were doing everything to bring about death, but that it would
not work, the constitution possessed vitality, was resisting?
Was such a way of dealing with the question possible or not!
KAZAKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: Or did you desire the same result as Yagoda
did, because you calculated that Yagoda would perhaps also be
of use to you later in the struggle for your so-called scientific
career? Do you understand my question?
KAZAKOV: I understand. It should be borne in mind that
this was in 1933 . . .
VYSHINSKY: I know it was in 1933, and this does not change
anything ....
KAZAKOV: And at that time a sufficient study had not yet
been made of the biological effect of the lysates.
VYSHINSKY: There you are again with your-"biological,
potential, non-potential, sensibilization'' and other such smart
words, but the point at issue is plain poisoning, murder. What
was wanted of you was the result, that is, to bring about death.
I ask you: could you have pictured the matter thus, that you were
trying but nothing came of it, or could you not?
KAZAKOV: Were I to be asked today ...
VYSHINSKY: No, not today .... I ask you, could you, or anybody in your place, who did not want to become an accomplice to
such a hideous crime, have adopted such an attitude in this question, if you were unable to inform or to report the matter to anybody
and so forth.
KAZAKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: If you placed the question of your personal
well-being above the life of the leaders of our Party and government, above the interests of the Soviet state, if you sank so
low, then could you not have found a last refuge in fooling Yagoda
and saying: I am doing my best to bring about a mortal result,
but it does not work? Could you or could you not?
KAZAKOV: I shall answer that if you introduce these three
lysates ...
VYSHINSKY: I am not asking you about that. Did you understand my question? Could you have left your undertaking to
Yagoda unfulfilled, have deceived him? Did Yagoda understand
anything of medicine? If doctors could not make head or tail
of your witches' cauldron, then what can be said of Yagoda?
KAZAKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: Could you or could you not have pretended
that you were fulfilling his instructions, while in reality as far
as you yourself were concerned, not fulfilling them?
KAZAKOV: I could have. I must now say that these three
607

lysates are contraindicated in respect to angina pectoris, but if
we were now to select any patient with angina pectoris, and to
introduce these three lysates, they would not result in death.
Even adrenalin is given ...
VYSHINSKY: So then what follows?
KAZAKOV: So then it follows that I calculated on killing,
but did not do so.
VYSHINSKY: For what purpose did you introduce these
lysates? To kill Menzhinsky?
KAZAKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: Did you introduce the lysates for this end?
Were you certain then that they would assist your crimes?
KAZAK OV: You see, lysates have a dual effect.
VYSHlNSKY: You dare to assert that these three lysates were
harmless for Menzhinsky?
KAZAKOV: Yes. These three lysates were harmless.
VYSHINSKY: And could you have fooled Yagoda?
KAZAKOV: (No reply.)
VYSHINSKY: In view of the impossibility of getting a direct answer to this clear question, I request the Court to adjourn
the session and to make it possible for the Commission of Experts
to answer the questions I have put to Kazakov.
THE PRESIDENT (to the experts): Can you answer now?
THE EXPERTS: No, we ask leave to do so after the adjournment.
.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for half an hour.

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is comi11g, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Can the experts give their conclusions on the additional questions
of the Procurator?
EXPERT WITNESS PROFESSOR BURMIN: Yes, we are
ready. (Reads out.)
Answers of the Commission of Medical Experts to the Questions
Submitted by the State Prosecutor

"Question: Was there any control and could there have been
any control in the preparation of lysates by I. N.·Kazakov?
"Answer: There was ~o control, nor coJIIO. there be any,
for at that time (in 1933 ·and the first half of 1934-the time when
Kazakov treated the late Comrade Menzhi nsky) the method of
preparing the lysates was kept a strict secret by Kazakov.
608

"Question: Did the employment by Kazakov of lysates
of thyroid gland, hypophysis and the medullar stratum of the
suprarenal gland play a decisive role in worsening the condition
of health of Comrade V. R. Menzhinsky?
"Answer: The employment of the above-mentioned lysates
(thyroid gland, hypophysis and medullar stratum of the suprarenal gland) taking into account the serious heart disease from
which the late V. R. Menzhinsky was suffering was impermissible, and I. N. Kazakov could not but be aware of this.
"The harmful effect of these lysates in the given specific
case was aggravated by the circumstance that over a lengthy
period of time foxglove preparations were simultaneously
administered to V. R. Menzhinsky, the effect of which was
undoubtedly intensified under the influence of the lysates.
"Such a combination of methods of treatment could not but
lead to the exhaustion of the heart muscles of the patient V. R .
.Menzhinsky and thereby to the acceleration of his death.
EXPERT WITNESSES:

Professor D. A. Burmin, Scientist of Merit
Professor N. A. Shereshevsky, Scientist of Merit
Professor V. N. Vinogradov
Professor D. M. Rossisky
V. D. Zipalov, Doctor of Medicine.
Moscow, March 9, 1938."
THE PRESIDENT: Are there any questions to the accused
Kazakov in connection with the conclusions of the commission
of experts?
VYSHINSKY: I wish to ask permission to read out the testimony of Kazakov as stated in Vol. XIX, pp. 68 and 69 where he
outlined the contents of formula No. 2, and testified as follows:
"In so far as this formula already included three sympathico·
tropous lysates, lysate of thyroid gland, medullar stratum of
suprarenal gland and hypophysis, and in an excessive dose
taken internally, the process of weakening and exhausting the
reserve energy of the patient Menzhinsky, suffering from cardiac
trouble, by reason of the intense activity called forth by the
combination of lysates and heart stimulants, began to develop
sharply, and during the night of May 9 Menzhinsky died with
manifestations of the collapse of cardiac activity."
KAZAKOV: Absolutely correct, there is no divergence here.
THE PRESIDENT: just one moment, you are not being questioned yet.
VYSHINSKY: And the next part:
"Although Menzhinsky suffered from bronchial asthma, what
came sharply to the forefront with him was angina pectoris, there-

39

609

fore with a correct formula only such lysates against bronchia 1
asthma were permissible for him as did not affect the angina pectori s. At the beginning that was how the correct formula was constructed. . . . But from December 1933 onwards (on the proposal
of Yagoda and Levin to exhaust Menzhinsky's heart) three· lysates contraindicated in the case of angina pectoris were included
and the proper lysates were withdrawn."
Do you confirm this testimony?
KAZAKOV: This is some misunderstanding. I testified to this
before and I do so now.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Kazakov, are you now agreed with
the testimony you made before?
KAZAKOV: I am, and completely confirm it.
.
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: Do I understand
correctly that formula No. 2 of which Comrade the Prosecutor
spoke here amounts to the fact that the combined treatment by
your lysates together with powerful doses of heart stimulants was
inevitably bound to lead to a weakening of the cardiac activity
of Comrade Menzhinsky? Is that correct?
KAZAKOV: Yes, absolutely correct, otherwise there would
not have been these results. In this case the only real test was
death from which you cannot escape. And had I attempted to deceive Yagoda I could have done so for three or four days, and
further he would have caught me. But it was impossible to escape
this one and only test.
VYSHINSKY: The test by death?
KAZAKOV: Yes, the test by death.
VYSHINSKY: And you were its assistant?
KAZAKOV: Yes, from the very outset I stated that these
stimulants affected the heart. Formula No. 2 was prescribed in
Apri I, because the first formula had a weak effect, while the second one was stronger.
VYSHINSKY: The question amounted to the one thing: in
the given combination the Iysates of hypophysis, medullar stratum
of suprarenal glands and thyroid gland were harmful to Menzhinsky. Do you admit that?
KAZAKOV: I never denied it.
VYSHINSKY: This question was submitted to the Commission
of Experts because you alleged that these lysates were neutral.
KAZAKOV: I could not have said so, because lysates cannot
be neutral.
VYSHINSKY: Inasmuch as we have a definite finding from
the Commission of Experts and Kazakov has repudiated his statement about the neutrality of these lysates, I think that the
question can be considered closed.
. . .·
T.HE PRESIDENT: Have you any more questions?·
610

VYSH JN SKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Have th'e Counsel for Defertce ahy. queS-:
tions?
.
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE: (Reply in the negative:)
THE PRESIDENT: Have the accused any questions?
THE ACCUSED: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: We shall proceed to the examination of
the accused Maximov-Dikovsky.
MAXIMOV-DIKOVSKY: I fully confirm the testimony given
by me at the preliminary investigation.
THE PRESIDENT: Tell us about your anti-Soviet activity.
MAXIMOV-DIKOVSKY: My association with· the Rights
dates back to 1928. At the Institute I became closely acquainted
with Gaister, a·specialist on the agrarian questions, who was already
a Right at that time. He won my complete confidence, and was
a man of sufficient authority in my eyes. During 1928 I met him
frequently, and we conversed on various political questions,
especially questions of Party policy. He tried to persuade me and
soon did persuade me that on these questions the Rights held a
more correct position than the Central Committee, to.corroborate
which he cited various tendentiously selected data on the economic
and political situation of the country, data which were calumnious
and had nothing in common with the actual situation in the country.
From the beginning of 1929 I already also held the views of
the Rights and entered on the anti-Party, counter-revolutionary
· path.
·
Pollowi ng the tactics of the Rights centre, not only did I refrain from ever speaking against the Party policy, but l even
tried not to associate with those Rights who had already managed
to compromise themselves. Like all the Rights, I too masked
myself and practised duplicity.
In the subsequent years, 1930, 1931, my connections with
the· Rights became stronger. Through Gaister· I· knew .that the
trio-Rykov, Bukharin and Tomsky-were intensifying their
struggle against the Party, that in a number of regions of the
R.S.F.S.R. and national republics they had formed their own
underground, illegal organizations. At the end of 1931, at one
of my meetings with Gaister he reproached me for passivity. When
Gaister learnt that I was graduating from the Institute he a~ked
me how I would take it if he recommended me to fairly responsible
work in Kuibyshev's Secretariat. I did not decline. At the beginning of 1932 I was summoqed to an interview with Kuibyshev,
and after some time I started work.
During 1932 my conrJ,ection with the Rights grew stronger.
Through Gaister I made' the acquaintance of other Rights-Ro39*

611

senthal and Kraval. l made the acquaintance of Smirnov-an
official in the State Planning Commission-Deich, and others.
Then Gaister put me in touch with Yenukidze. He told me that
Yenukidze himself was a Right and according to him was close
to the Rights' centre or a member of it. "Since you are working
practically along the same corridor you must call up and establish
connections with Yenukidze." After calling up on the telephone,
I went to see Yenukidze. He already knew that I was to come
to him. We became acquainted. I shall omit a number of the details of our subsequent meetings. From Yenukidze I learnt that
the Rights stood for the overthrow of the existing leadership,
so as to change the policy and divert the development of the country into the paths of restoring capitalism.
In the middle of 1934, at the end of August, Yenukid1e rang
me up one day and told me to come over for a talk, which subsequently had the most serious consequences for me. During this
talk Yenukidze told me: "Whereas formerly the Rights calculated that the Soviet government could be overthrown by organizing certain of the more anti-Soviet minded strata of the population, and in particular the kulaks, now the situation has changed.
This stake is forfeit, and it is necessary to proceed to more active
methods of seizing power." He interpreted these more active
methods to me then and there: in agreement with the Trotskyites,
the Rights' centre had adopted a decision that it was necessary
to commit a number of terrorist acts against members of the Political Bureau. This had to be achieved by the method of ruining
the health of the leaders. At the same time he told me that a part
of the doctors of the Kremlin Medical Administration had been
recruited or enlisted for this business, that this method was the
most convenient because of the fact that on the surface it would
appear in the nature of an unfortunate issue to an illness and thereby make it possible for this terrorist activity of the Rights to
be camouflaged.
"You," he said, "must take part in a terrorist act against
Kuibyshev; preparations for it have already begun. Doctors Levin and Pletnev will manage to do their job. What is demanded
of you is, first, to give them the opportunity of being unhindered
so that they can be in frequent attendance on the patient, so that
there should be no hitch in their so-called visits to the patient;
and, secondly, in the event of acute illness, attacks of any kind,
.not to hurry in calling ix:i the doctor, and if it is necessary, to call
in only those doctors who are treating him. ''
Despite the fact that I myself was a member of the counterrevolutionary organization of the Rights, I must say that this
tum in the conversation was somewhat of a shock for me, a really
big shock. I did not anticipate such a turn. I listened to him
612

fairly calmly while he was speaking in general. Observing that I
was a bit flustered Yenukidze went on talking. "You," he says,
"obviously underestimate the strength of the Rights in the country;
we have many more Right organizations and members than you
sup~ose." Here he said that Yagoda was one of our members,
that he had the opportunity of employing any of the abundant
measures which were at his disposal against any of our supporters
who would become a traitor.
I answered neither yes nor no. The talk was postponed, but
it was soon resumed. Soon he sent for me again; Yagoda was there
too, and after the characterization which Yenukidze had given
on the last occasion, his presence was eloquent enough. Again
the conversation dealt exclusively with the preparation of a terrorist act against Kuibyshev. I agreed to it. After that, events
developed at a rapid pace. As a result of the so-called treatment,
Kuibyshev's health got worse and worse. Then came the time
when Kuibyshev began to get ready for a business trip to Central
Asia. Yenukidze sent for me again and demanded: "During his
trip to Central Asia you must absolutely send for a doctor from
Moscow. Levin will go.'' On arriving in Central Asia Kuibyshev
fell ill with angina. Then an abscess formed in his thro?t. Kuibyshev refused to send for a doctor from Moscow, and an operation
was performed by a local doctor in Tashkent. The operation was
successful. But on returning to Moscow, Kuibyshev's health
became worse; complications set in from the illness he had suffered in Central Asia. In spite of his health being in such a state,
the doctors, who attended him about three times, found his health
satisfactory. And I kept reassuring him, referring to the statements of the doctors. Finally, the catastrophe came, just on a
day when Kuibyshev was at work. He felt ill, was very pale,
and there were undoubtedly all the symptoms of an approaching
attack. This was at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. He went hpme.
I rang up Y enukidze and said that Kuibyshev had gone home,
that he was very ill. I had no doubt that this was the result of
the treatment that had been employed. Yenukidze told me not
to get flustered but to do what was needed and not to hurry with
calling in the doctor. Fifteen or twenty minutes passed. Kuibyshev left at 2 o'clock and his death occurred at half past three.
I had a telephone call from his home that Kuibyshev was in a
bad way.
I sent for the doctor, but when the doctor came Kuibyshev
was already dead, it was too late.
This is how matters really stood. That is what I had to tell
yeu about the terrorist act which was organized by Yenukidze
and Yagoda on the instruction of the centre, in the commission
of which I took a criminal part.
613

THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any questions to put to the accused?
VYSHINSKY: Yes, I .have ..
Who drew you into the plot?
MAXIMOV: Yenukidze and Yagoda.
VYSHINSKY: Did you have occasion to discuss this affair
with Yagoda?
MAXIMOV: Yes, I did.
VYSHINSKY: When was this?
MAXIMOV: The first conversation was in the presence of
Yenukidze.
VYSHINSKY: About what?
MAXIMOV: About bringing on the death of Kuibyshev, by
the method about which I have spoken, with my participation.
VYSHINSKY:- Yenukidze was present at this conversation,
Yagoda was there as well?
MAXIMOV: Yes. In addition, I had a talk in Yenukidze 's
apartment.
·
·
VYSHINSKY: Who was in the apartment at the time of Kuibyshev's death? ·
MAXIMOV: I told you-the house worker.
VYSHINSKY: Were Bukharin and Rykov party to the murder
of Kuibyshev?
·
MAXIMOV: Yenukidze said that the Rights' centre-that is,
Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky-were taking part in this affair.
THE PRESIDENT: Are there any more questions?
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
BUKHARIN: I have a question.
Do you confirm.that in your first conversation with Yenukidze
he told you about the decision of this trio?
MAXIMOV: Yes, he did.
BUKHARIN: This was in 1932?
MAXIMOV: This was in 1934.
BUKHARIN: You said that Yenukidze' initiated you into
this Gonspiracy against Kuibyshev?
MAXIMOV: I said that the meeting with Yenukidze was
~ecret. He spoke about a conspiracy, about .a terrorist act .. This
was· in 1934.
BUKHARIN: That is, not in the first conversation?.
MAXIMOV: Not in the first conversation.
BUKHARIN: Gaister put you in tonch with Yenukidze?
MAXIMOV: Yes, at the end of' I~
·
BUKHARIN: You received the iristruction not· af the ~nd
of 1932, but in 1934?
· ·
MAXIMOV: Yes.
614

BUKHARIN: In the first conversation he told you that Yagoda
was a member of the organization?
MAXIMOV: He saw that I was. hesitating and mentioned
such a name as Yagoda 's.
BUKHARIN: On the occasion following this, you had a
meeting with Yenukidze in the presence of Yagoda?
MAXIMOV: Yes.
BUKHARIN: Now allow me to ask how many· times you met
Yenukidze before 1934 and whether you conversed on political
topics of a counter-revolutionary nature.
MAXIMOV: The end of 1932, the beginning of 1933, the first
half of 1934, several times.
BUKHARIN: But to be -exact?
MAXIMOV: Several times, about seven or eight times.
BUKHARIN: Why, then, did you need to have Gaister 's
recommendation?
MAXIMOV Because -at the end of 1932 Yenukidze did not
know me.
BUKHARIN: Gaister introduced you to Yenukidze in what
year?
- ·
·
MAXIMOV: At the end of 1932.
BUKHARIN: And in 1934 you met both Yenukidze and
Yagoda for the second time?
-MAXIMOV: Yes.
BUKHARIN: I have nothing more to ask.
VYSHINSKY: Then, in 1934 Gaister introduced you or rather
brought you together with Yenukidze?
MAXIMOV: Quite right. In our language that was called
''bringing together.''
. .
VYSHINSKY: After this you met Yenukidze. several times?
MAXIMOV: Yes, several times; you see we worked _along tl!e
same· corridor.
·
- VYSHINSKY: What were the occasions ·tor· you·r meetings?
MAXIMOV: On the one hand 'he gave me info~atien, then
he received certain information from me . . .
·
VYSHINSKY: Tn short, you met as accomplices?
MAXIMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: When did you- join the Rights? .
-MAXIMOV: In general ih i928, but it was made more formal
in 1929.
_ .VY?HINSKy: Conse_quently, by this time you· already _had
certain t;tn<l:erg~ound'. experience?
MAXIMOV: Yes.
··vvsfIINSKY: Wtien "did. you firsf speak- with Yenukidze
ab-Out ·co"rtspiratorfal affairs?·
- MAXIMOV: fle' spoke to me in i932.
615

VYSHINSKY: Thus, beginning with 1932 'Yenukidze knew
you as a member of the underground organization of the Rights?
MAXIMOV: Quite right.
VYSHINSKY: When you first began to discuss these underground topics with him and began to get on a closer footing
along these lines, did he put the question about terrorism at
once, or did he prepare you for it gradually?
MAXIMOV: He put this question much later. ...
VYSHINSKY: That is, he approached this question gradually?
MAXIMOV: Yes.
VYSHINSKY: And the last question-which interested Bukharin: consequently, in the first conversation with Yenukidze he
let you into the secret that a terrorist act was being prepared?
MAXIMOV: Not at once.
VYSHINSKY: But as a preliminary to this question ...
MAXIMOV: He prepared me.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the Counsel for Defence any questions?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: No.
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE BRAUDE: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the accused any questions? None.
(To Maximov.) Please be seated.
Adjournment for ten minutes.

*

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
I request the Commandant to summon the witness Belostotsky. (To the witness.) What is your surname, name and patronymic?
BELOSTOTSKY: Belostotsky, Maxim Yulianovich.
THE PRESIDENT: You have been summoned as a witness in
the present case at the petition of the Procurator. You are
required to give the Court exact and true testimony as to what
you know about the present case.
Comrade Procurator, have you any questions?
VYSHINSKY: What do you kn~w about the wrqng medical
treatment of Alexei Maximovich Gorky, and how is it that you
knQw about it?
·
·
BELOSTOTSKY: I was appointed by the Medical Administration of the Kremlin to give Alexei Maximovich Gorky intravenous infusions. Not being a therapeutist, I have seldom had
occasion to treat such patients. For the first time in my medical
career I found myself at the bedside of so seriously HI and so prom616

inent a man. Now, quite naturally, I remember in photographic
detail what took place in the last period of Alexei Maximovich
Gorky's illness and I considered it my civic duty to file a statement in the hope that I could be of some assistance to the
Soviet Court.
VYSHINSKY: In what did your observations consist and
·
just what do you want to tell the Court?
BELOSTOTSKY: Almost from the first days of Alexei Maximovich 's sickness, I had to make a fairly large number of intravenous infusions and injections of heart stimulants as, for example,
digalen, cardiosol, glucose with strophanthus, glucose, then
strophanthin.
VYSHINSKY: Well, did you think this was normal or not?
BELOSTOTSKY: I thought it was quite normal. I carried
out the doctors' instructions with the utmost accuracy and care.
VYSHINSKY: Further.
BELOSTOTSKY: There was one occasion-regarding glucose
with strophanthus and strophanthin. I was apprehensive about
this preparation. I knew from literature that this preparation was
very dangerous, that it should be used only in exceptional cases. I
took the liberty of drawing this to the attention of Professor
Levin and asking whether it was advisable for this preparation
to be administered. Levin immediately cancelled this injection.
VYSHINSKY: Why?
BELOSTOTSKY: Obviously, he thought it over and decided
that perhaps it was indeed not advisable administering this
preparation for the present.
VYSHINSKY: But why had he not thought about this before,
he is a therapeutist?
BELOSTOTSKY: r do not know.
VYSHINSKY: Did you not ask him?
BELOSTOTSKY: No, I did not.
VYSHINSKY: You considered it wrong to use this preparation?
BELOSTOTSKY: I thought then that it was not quite right.
VYSHINSKY: Although you are not a specialist in this field?
BELOSTOTSKY: No, I am not a specialist.
VYSHINSKY: What else do you fwantl to tell the Court?
BELOSTOTSKY: I remember ·that a very large number of
cardiac injections were made. I want to direct attention to the
fact that during the preparation of the regular intravenous infusions,. Professor Pletnev came up to me and whispered in my ear:
"Why are you doing that? In such a cQndition the patient
should be allowed to die in peace. "
VYSHINSKY: Not to save· him?
BEL05TOTSKY: Not to save him.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions.
617

THE PRES! DENT: Have the Commission of Experts any questions?
COMMISSION OF EXPERTS: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: Have the Counsel for Defence any
questions?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRES ID ENT: Have the accused any questions?
THE ACCUSED: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: Witness Belostotsky, you are free from
giving further evidence.
VYSHINSKY: I have no more questions to the accused in
connection with this episode; but later, when we proceed to the
next point, I will have additional questions by the end of the
Court proceedings.
.
· I think it would be expedient to hear the findings of the Commission of Experts now.
THE PRESIDENT: The findings of the Commission of Experts
are not ready yet. Adjournment for twenty minutes, after which
the findings of the Commission of Experts will be heard.

*

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Professor Burmin, Scientist of Merit, will read the findings
of the Commission of Experts.
·
(Professor Burmin reads):

Answers of the Commission of Medical .
Experts to the Questions Submitted by the. State Prosecutor
1. On the killing of A. M. Gorky.

Question: Was it permissible to appoint a regimen of 'long
walks after dinner, especially when accompanied by exhausting
work, for a patient who suffered from acute pnetinioscl.erosis,
broncho-e:tasiae and cavities i~ the lungs, yulnron-~ry e~physema
and deterioration of the card10-vascular system, and who was
subje-ct to: severe periodic haemorrhage? · ·
Might such a regimen,· practised over a long period, cause ·the
deterioratfon of ·the health of the patient and ·especially of the
caraio=vascular . system?
. .
. . .. . '
Answer: Such a regimen was. ilndoubt~dly. irnp·ermissible and
could lead to deterioration iii· tlie· health of ·the 'patient ·and, in
-particular, to'deterioration of the state of the cardfo-'vascular system.
Question: Was it permissible· to place such a patient in an
'618

apartment where there were known to be persons suffering trom
grippe?
- Answer: Absolutely impermissible, ·because· the patient. was
sure to become infected with grippe under the circumstances.
Question: Was the care of the patient correct, and were the
case history and the treatment -0f A. M. Gorky properly conducted
during·his last illness, which lasted from May 31 t-0 June 18, 1936?
Answer: The grave condition of the patient was registered
clearly enough in the case history:; but the details of the treatment
were registered in a criminally negligent manner.
Question: Is it permissible in· general for prnlonged, large
rloses of heart stimulants, namely, d~gitalis, digalen (extracts
of foxg-love), strophanthin and strophanthus, to be administered intravenously, subcutaneously ·and internany at the same time, and,
in particular, in the case of th'e- very -sick patient A. M. Gorky,
who was sixty-eight years of age, and stiff ered from the abovementioned affection of the internal organs?
Answer: Absolutely. impermissjb~e.
·
. Question: What may have been the consequences of such
treatment ·of A. -M~ Gorky during his fast illness?·
Answer:- Such a method of treatment in general could only
lead to exhaustion of the· cardiac muscles, and in the given case
could induce a fatal result.
Question'. Can it be granted that properly qualified physicians could have adopted such a wrong method of treatment without malicious intent?
Answer: No, it cannot.
Question: May it be regarded as estab_lished, on. the basis
of the sum total of these facts, that the method of treatment of
A. M. Gorky was a d~iberate act of wrecking designed to hasten his
death_, the e?Cpert knowledge· pos~essed by the accus~d ·Levin· and
Ple_trr~v ·having. been. utili:ied f<?r the <1ttajnment of this criminal
end?· ·
· ·
·
An:swer: Yes, it· can· be taken· as established. beyond ·ctoubt.

2. On the_ /filling of

v. V. K4ibyshev.

Question: Was it permissible to prescribe-prolonged administration of farge dose5 of "digitalis (foxglOve) to the patient
V.;_ y. Kuibyspev, who .~uff.er:~ fr-0rn attacks· of .~ngina pectoris
~l:Jd a4yg11ce:ct arterio;sefore$i$~
·
Answer: No,· it :was. imp:ermiss.ible.
- : QUestion: Might the: administratio·n of large doses: of extracts
of:lfoxglove ·over a long period (several months) have contributed to increasing the frequency of the attacks of angina pectoris?
619

Answer: Yes, it could have induced more frequent attacks
of angina pectoris.
Question: Is it permissible in case of attacks of angina pectoris to allow the patient to move about and to climb stairs, and
may a patient suffering from an attack of angina pectoris be left
without immediate medical attention?
Answer: It is absolutey impermissible and criminal, since
this can lead, and in the present case did lead, to death.
Question: May it be regarded as established, on the basis
of the sum total of these facts, that the method of treatment of
V. V. Kuibyshev was a deliberate act of wrecking designed to hasten his death, the expert knowledge possessed by the accused,
as well as the fact that V. V. Kuibyshev was deliberately left
without medical attention during one of his usual attacks of
angina pectoris, being utilized for this purpose?
Answer: Yes, it may be taken as established beyond doubt.
3. On the killing of V. R. Menzhinsky.

Question: Was the prolonged administration of extracts of
foxglove, especially in conjunction with lysates, which tend to
enhance the action of foxglove extracts, permissible in the case
of the patient V. R. Menzhinsky, who suffered from arterio-sclerosis, accompanied by severe attacks of angina pectoris and infarctions of the myocardium?
Answer: No, it was absolutely impermissible and criminal.
Question: Might such a method of treatment have contributed to the exhaustion of the cardiac muscles and thus have contributed to a fatal issue?
Answer: Yes, it absolutely might have done so.
Question: May it be regarded as established, on the basis
of the sum total of these facts, that the accused L. G. Levin and
I. N. Kazakov deliberately adopted wrecking methods of treating
Comrade Menzhinsky, making it their criminal aim to bring about
the earliest onset of death, which did in fact result from their criminal actions?
Answer: Yes, it may be taken as established beyond doubt.
4. On the killing of M. A. Peshkov.

Question: In the case of M. A. Peshkov, who suffered from
croupous pneumonia, as described in the testimony of the accused
Levin, was the treatment conducted properly?
Answer: The treatment of M. A. Peshkov as described in
the testimony of the accused Levin was conducted wrongly and
criminally:
620

1) No use was made of the anti-pneumococcus serum, which
according to the accused Levin's own admission could have been
beneficial in the treatment of the patient;
2) Narcotics~morphia and pantopon-were prescribed in
impermissibly large doses;
3) No heart stimulants were used.
Question: Might this wrong method of treatment, employed
by the accused Levin, have contributed to a fatal issue of the sickness?
Answer: Such treatment not only did not help the organism
to combat the disease, but, on the contrary, impaired the condition of the patient.
Question: May it be regarded as established that the accused Levin, having set himself the criminal aim of hastening the
death of M. A. Peshkov, deliberately adopted a wrecking method
of treatment for the accomplishment of his criminal aim?
A:zswer: Yes, it may be taken as established beyond doubt.
COMMISSION OF EXPERTS:

Professor D. A Burmin, Scientist of Merit
Professor N. A. Shereshevsky, Scientist of Merit
Professor V. N. Vinogradov
Professor D. M. Rossisky
V. D. Zipalov, Doctor of Medicine
Moscow, March 9, 1938

On the poisoning of Comrade N. I. Yezf.ov.
Question: May it be concluded from the materials submitted to the experts regarding the organization of the poisoning of
Comrade N. I. Yezhov that the accused G. G. Yagoda and P. P. Bulanov employed for the attainment of their criminal aim extremely dangerous and highly potent means for the gradual poisoning
of Comrade N. I. Yezhov?
Answer: On the basis of the chemical analyses of the carpet,
curtains, upholstery and the air in Comrade N. I. Yezhov 's office, as well as analyses of his urine and the nature of the
morbid symptoms which he manifested, it must be taken as absolutely established that the poisoning of Comrade N. I. Yezhov
by mercury absorbed through the respiratory tracts, the most
potent and dangerous method of chronic mercurial poisoning, was
organized and put into execution.
Question: May it be regarded as established that as a result of the methods employed by the accused G. G. Yagoda and
P. P. Bulanov to poison Comrade N. I. Yezhov his health was
considerably impaired and that if the crime had not been discov621

ered in time the!'e was a direct menace to the life of Comrade
.
N. I. Yezhoy?
Answer: Yes, it should ·be taken as established that as. a
result of the method of gradual_ly poisoning Comrade N. I. Yezhov
employed by the accused G. G. Yagoda and P. P. Bulanov, his
health was considerably impaired and that if the present crime had
not been- discovered in time the life of Comrade N. I. Yezhov wo.uld
have been in immediate danger.
COMMISSION OF EXPERTS:

Professor D. A. Burmin, Scientist. of Merit
Professor N. A. Shereshevsky, Scientist of Merit
Professor V. N. Vinogradov
Professor D. M. Rossisky
V. D. Zipalov, Doctor of Medicine
Moscow, March 9, 1938.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Procurator, have you any questions to put to the Commission of Experts?
VYSHINSKY: Only one question-are the answers to these
questions the unanimous opinion of all the expert witnesses, or
has any of the expert witnesses a special point of view?
BURMIN: They are unanimous.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the Counsel for Defence any questions?
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE BRAUDE: No.
THE PRESJDENT: Have the accused any questions?
THE ACCUSED: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT (to Vyshinsky): Are there any questions
in connection with the findings of the Commission of Experts?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: The Counsel for Defence have no questlons.
The accused have no questions to put to each other. Are there any
additional statements, questions?
VYSHINSKY: I have no questions to put to the Commission
of_Experts. I have some questions to put to certain of the accused.
THE PRESIDENT: You may.
VYSHINSKY: Accused Rosengoltz, as is evident from the
record-in Vol. VI, p. 17-when Rosengoltz was arrested, a
small piece of dry bread wrapped up in a bit of newspaper and
sewed into a piece of cloth was found in his hip pocket, and in this
bit of bread was a prayer written out on a piece of paper. J would
like the Court's permission to read some passages from the text
of this so~alled p_rayer an9. to ask the accused Rosengoltz to give
his, explanation of this. (To Rosengoltz.) Do you deny· this fact?
Here is the text:
f>22

"Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them also
that hate him flee before him. As smoke is driven away,
so drive them away: as wax melteth before the fire, so let
the wicked perish at the presence of God. . . .
_
-·
"He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty. I will say of
the Lord, He is my refuge and my fortress:_ my _God; in him
will I trust. Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the
fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He shall cover thee
with his feathers, and under his wings shalt thou trust: his
truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Thou shalt not be afraid
for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day;
nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the
destruction that wasteth at noonday .... ''
How did this get into your pocket?
ROSENGOL TZ: My wife put it in my pocket one day before
I went to work. She said it was for good luck.
VYSHINSKY: And when was this?
ROZENGOL TZ: Several months before my arrest.
VYSHINSKY: And you carried this "good luck" in your hip
pocket for several months?
ROZENGOL TZ: I did not even pay attention ...
VYSHINSKY: Nevertheless, you saw what your wife was
doing?
ROZENGOL TZ: I was in a hurry.
VYSHINSKY: But you were told that this was a family talisman for good luck?
ROZENGOLTZ: Something of the sort.
VYSHINSKY: And you agreed to become the keeper of a talisman? I have no more questions.
THE PRESIDENT: Have you any questions to the other accused?
VYSHINSKY: No.
THE PRESIDENT: Have the Counsel for Defence any questions?
THE COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE: (Reply in the negative.)
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for one hour, after which
the session will be resumed in camera.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist!
PresUlent of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER

Military Jurist First Rank

623

THE SESSION IN CAMERA
At the session in camera the accused RAKOVSKY, GRINKO,
ROSENGOLTZ and KRESTINSKY gave evidence about their
treasonable, espionage connections with certain official representatives of certain foreign states.
The Court established both the exact identity of the representatives with whom the above-mentioned conspirators from the antiSoviet "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' were connected, and the
states they represented.
At this session in camera the accused G. G. YAGO DA gave
testimony in which he fully admitted to organizing the murder
of Comrade M.A. PESHKOV, stating that he had pursued personal aims as well as conspiratorial aims in committing this murder.

MORNING SESSION, MARCH 11, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming.
Please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Comrade Vyshinsky, Procurator of the U.S.S.R., will speak for
the Prosecution.
VYSHINSKY: Comrades judges, members of the Militarv
Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
"
In proceeding to make my speech for the Prosecution in the
present case, which constitutes an exceptional phenomenon of
extraordinary public and political significance, I would like in
the first place to direct your attention to certain distinguishing
features of this case, to certain of its outstanding peculiarities.
It is not for the first time that the Supreme Court of our
country is examining a case involving gravest crimes directed
against the well-bemg of our country, against our Socialist fatherland, the fatherland of the working people of the whole world.
But I will hardly be mistaken if I say that this is the first time
that our Court has had to examine a case like this, to examine
a case of such crimes and such foul deeds as those that have passed
at this trial before your eyes, before the eyes of the whole world,
a case of such criminals as those you now see in the prisoners' dock.
With every day and every hour that passed, as the Court investigation on the present case proceeded, it brought to light
ever more of the horrors of the chain of shameful, unparalleled,
monstrous crimes committed by the accused, the entire abominable chain of heinous deeds before which the base deeds of the
most inveterate, vile, unbridled and despicable criminals fade
and grow dim.
·
·
And indeed, what trial of all those that have taken place hereand there have been not a few of them lately due to the conditions of the class struggle and of the furious resistance of our enemies to the cause of Socialism-can compare with the present
trial in the monstrosity, brazenness and cynicism of the crimes
committed by these gentlemen?
In what other trial was it possible to uncover and expose the
real nature of these crimes with such force and depth, with
40

625

such force to tear the mask of perfidy from the faces of scoundrels,
and to show to the whole of our people and all honest people
throughout the world the bestial countenance of the international
brigands who cunningly and cleverly direct the hand of miscreants
against our peaceful Socialist labour that has set up the new,
happy, joyously flourishing Socialist society of workers and
peasants?
This circumstance alone provides sufficiently clear proof of
the tremendous social and political significance of this trial,
of the fact that the present trial constitutes an outstanding phenomenon, that the present trial is of historic significance.
What constitutes the historic significance of the present trial?
What are some of its distinguishing features?
The historic significance of this trial consists before all in the
fact that at this trial it has been shown, proved and established
with exceptional scrupulousness and exactitude that the Rights,
Trotskyites, Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries, bourgeois nationalists, and so on and so forth, are nothing other than a gang
of murderers, spies, diversionists and wreckers, without any
principles or ideals.
Exactly a year ago, when analysing the shortcomings in
our work and indicating the measures whereby to liquidate the
Trotskyite and other double-dealers, Comrade Stalin said:
"Two words about wreckers, diversionists, spies, etc.
I think it is clear to everybody now that the present-day
wreckers and diversionists, no matter what disguise they
may adopt, either Trotskyite or Bukharinite, have long ceased
to be a political trend in the labour movement, that they
have become transformed into a gang of professional wreckers,
diversionists, spies and assassins, without principles anrl
without ideals. Of course, these gentlemen must be ruthlessly
smashed and uprooted as the enemies of the working class,
as betrayers of our country. This is clear and requires no
further explanation."
A year has gone hy. The example of the present trial shows us
how profoundly right was Comrade Stalin in his estimation
of the Trotskvites and Bukharinites.
The Trotskyites and Bukharinites, that is to say, the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites," the leading lights of which are now
in the prisoners' dock, is not a political party, a political tendency,
but a band of felonious criminals, and not simply felonious criminals, but of criminals who have sold themselves to enemy intelligence services, criminals whom even ordinary felons treat as
the basest, the lowest, the ·most contemptible, the most depraved
of the depraved.

626

The so-called "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites;; is an orgatt·
ization engaged in espionage, acts of diversion and wrecking,
political murder and in selling their country to the enemy.
The bloc has no ideals; there is nothing "spiritual," so to
speak, nothing ideological about it. That which some of the participants of this bloc once possessed, in some measure or other, has
long ago been squandered and lost, has long ago vanished and gone
rotten in the foul-smelling, abominable underworld of spies.
True, some of the accused, particularly the accused Bukharin,
made attempts on more than one occasion at this trial, as the
French say, to keep a straight face while the going's bad, to assume
the appearance of people with "ideals," to cover up their bandit
criminal activity with all kinds of "philosophical," "ideological"
and other chatter.
Bukharin attempted here to reduce the whole nightmare of
his heinous crimes to some sort of "ideological lines" about which
he attempted to deliver lengthy and pompous speeches. Bukharin
spoke here of the division of labour in this spying and wrecking
organization, of some sort of "programmatic items," of some
sort of "ideological orientation,'' albeit, he added, an ideological
orientation on the kulaks.
Bukharin tried to represent his own role in this gang as that
of a ''theoretician.'' On the fourth day of the trial, when the crimes
of felonious espionage committed by this so-called bloc had been
fully exposed, Bukharin had the effrontery to say literally the
following:
·
"I mainly occupied myself with the problematics of general leadership and with the ideological side; this, of course,
did not exclude either my being aware of the practical side
of the matter, or the adoption of a number of practical steps
on my part."
Pray appraise the role of this little gentleman who alleges that
he was occupied not with the direction of all kinds of crimes,
and the most monstrous at that, but with the "problematics" of
these crimes, not with the organiz<rtion of these crimes, but with
the "ideological side" of these black deeds. Appraise the role
of this little gentleman who does the most rabid work of wrecking and destruction, taking advantage, on his own admission, of
all the difficulties of the Soviet power, who prepares and engineers
black treason, prepares the defeat of his country in war with fascist
enemies and hopes to hide his treason with jaunty, cynical chatter
about taking advantage of the war which "prognostically stood in
perspective.'' Appraise the role of this garrulous little gentleman
who says that the arch-bandit and Anglo-German spy Trotsky in
1932 already threw off his "Leftist uniform ".!_to employ Bukharin's words used here-and that ~e, Bukharin, together with

627

Rykov and Tomsky armed this gang of criminals with their
"ideology."
Caught red-handed in the act, Bukharin calls Hegel himself
as witness, hurls himself into the jungle of linguistics, philology
and rhetorics, mumbles some sort of learned words, so as to cover
up the traces in one way or another. But he does not stand the
test, and ends his scientific raving babble with the following
admission:
"We aU became rabid counter-revolutionaries, traitors to
the Socialist fatherland, we turned into spies, terrorists, and
restorers of capitalism. We embarked on treachery, crime,
and treason. We turned into an insurrectionary band, we
organized terrorist groups, engaged in wrecking activities,
wanted to overthrow the Soviet government of the proletariat."
To this Bukharin should have added: "We became a police
department of the Japanese and German intelligence services, we
became shameless barterers of our country.''
The bloc is an agency of foreign intelligence services. The
members of the bloc and its leaders, such as Trotsky, who is not
in the dock here, Bukharin, Rykov, Yagoda, Krestinsky, Rosengoltz, and its rank-and-file members, such as Zubarev, MaximovDikovsky and others, are slaves of these intelligence services,
they are bondmen of their masters.
What room, then, is there here for ideology, "problematics"
or "prognostics," for theory or philosophy?
Philosophy, behind the smoke-screen of which Bukharin tried
to hide here, is only a mask wherewith to cover up espionage and
treason.
Bukharin's literary-philosophical exercises are a screen behind
which he tries to hide from his final exposure.
Philosophy and espionage, philosophy and wrecking, philosophy and acts of diversion, philosophy and murder, like genius
and villainy, are two things that do not go together!
I know of no other instances-this is the first instance in
history of a spy and murderer using philosophy, like powdered
glass, to hurl it into his victim's eyes before dashing his brains
out with a footpad's bludgeon.
The historical significance of this trial lies first and foremost
in the fact that it has completely exposed the bandit character of
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," its ideological sterility,
exposed the fact that the bloc-all these Rights, Trotskyites, Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries, bourgeois nationalists, etc.,
etc.,-are all hired agents of the fascist intelligence services.
The "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" is no political grouping;
it is a_ gang of spies, of agents of foreign intelligence services.
This has been proved fully and incontestably. Herein lies the
628

enormous social, political and historical significance of the present
trial.
The "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" now in the dock-as
the trial has shown with the utmost clarity-is only an advance
detachment of international fascism, is a pack of hangmen and
surreptitious murderers, with whose aid fascism is operating in
various countries, primarily in Spain and in China.
That is why the exposure of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' as a gang of spies is of enormous importance not only for
our Socialist revolution, but also for the whole international
proletariat. It is of enormous importance for the cause of peace
throughout the world. It is of enormous importance for the whole
of human culture, for the fight for real democracy and the freedom
of nations, for the struggle against all and sundry warmongers,
against all international provocations and provocateurs.
That is why this trial is being followed with bated breath by
the working people throughout the world, and particularly in those
countries where the people are engaged in a heroic struggle for their
freedom, against fascist tyranny.
Under the leadership of Trotsky, under the leadership of the
·German, Japanese, Polish and other intelligence services, the
Bukharins and Rykovs, Yagodas and Bulanovs, Krestinskys and
Rosengoltzes, Ikramovs, Khodjayevs and Sharangoviches do their
dark deeds by order of their masters not only in our country, but
in Spain, in China, and wherever the class strugg~e of the working
people is going on, wherever honest people are fighting for genuine
freedom, for genuine democracy, for genuine human culture.
The Bukharins and Rykovs, Yagodas and Bulanovs, Krestinskys and Rosengoltzes, Ikramovs, Sharangoviches, Khodjayevs and
others are the very same as the Fifth Column, the POUM, theKuKlux
Klan. They are one of the detachments of the fascist provocateurs
and incendiaries of war operating on the international arena.
The smashing of this detachment is a great service to the
cause of peace, the cause of democracy, the cause of genuine
human culture.
The exceptional importance of the present trial is, however,
not limited to what I have said.
Here in the dock is not some one anti-Soviet group, the agents
of .some one foreign intelligence service. Here in the dock is a
number of anti-Soviet groups, the agents of the intelligence services
of a number of foreign powers hostile to the U.S.S.R.
Implicated in this "case" are the remnants of all anti-Soviet
forces, groups and organizations, and at least, as has been exactly
established by the trial, four foreign intelligence servicesthe Japanese, German, Polish and British-and, it goes without
saying, all the other foreign intelligence services which maintain

629

friendly, so-called operative contact with the above-mentioned
.
intelligence services.
Indeed, if we speak of Trotsky, his connections with the Gestapo were proved up to the hilt at the trials of the TrotskyiteZinovievite terrorist centre in August 1936 and of the anti-Soviet
Trotskyite centre in January 1937. Now, however, it has been
proved that his connections with the German political police and
the intelligence services of other countries date b~ck to a much ear_Iier period, that Trotsky has been connected with the German intelligence service since 1921. This has been stated quite definitely
by Krestinsky at the present trial. It is now a proved fact that
Trotsky has been connected with the British Intelligence Service
since 1926. This has been stated definitely and proved by the accused Rakovsky. The whole bloc headed by Trotsky consisted in
its entirety of foreign spies and agents of the tsarist Okhrana.
Through their accomplices Bukharin and Rykov were connected
with a number of foreign intelligence services, which they served
systematically.
Yagoda was surrounded, as with flies, with German, Japanese
and Polish spies whom he not only shielded, as he himself admitted.
here, but through whom he engaged in espionage work, supplying
foreign intelligence services with confidential state information,
selling and betraying our country to these foreign intelligence
services.
Krestinsky, on his own admission, has been a German spy since
1921.
Rosengoltz, one of the leaders of the Trotskyite underworld,
as has been established, began his espionage work for the German
General Staff, on his own admission, in 1923, and for the British
Intelligence Service, also on his own admission, in 1926.
Rakovsky, one of Trotsky's closest and particularly trusted
men, has been, according to his own testimony, an agent of the
British Intelligence Service since 1924, and an agent of the Japanese intelligence service since 1934.
Chernov, according to his own testimony, began his espionage
work for Germany in 1928, by forming a connection with the German intelligence service on the initiative and with the assistance
of the notorious emigre-the Menshevik, Dan.
S~arangovich was enrolled by the Polish intelligence service,
and in 1921 was sent to the U.S.S.R. to carry on espionage work.
Grinko, according to his own words, became a spy of the German and Polish intelligence services in 1932, and prior to this
maintained espionage connections with these intelli()'ence services
'
particularly with the Polish intelligence service. l:>
, Ikramov and Khodjayev through their bandit chiefs "worked"
under Bukharin's leadership on the establishment of contacts with
630

the resi?ent agents ?f the Bri~ish Inte11igence Service, to strengthen which the notorious Intelligence Service agent and adventurer
Lawrence expended a great deal of energy on the Central Asiatic
borders of the U.S.S.R.
Then follow the provocateurs and agents of the tsarist OkhranaZelensky, Zubarev, Ivanov-Ivanov being in addition a British
spy.
Add to this gang the group of poisoners and murderers-Levin,
Pletnev, Kazakov, Kryuchkov, Maximov-Dikovsky and the
others connected with them-and then the moral and political
countenance of this bloc and of each of its participants becomes
clear to the utmost.
That is why we can say that here is a foul-smelling heap of
human garbage, who stop at nothing, who have no qualms whatsoever, who are ready for anything-to blow up factories and
trains, to destroy cattle, to spoil grain, to engage in murder, espionage and high treason.
It is precisely all these criminal political and moral qualities
that made of the Rights and Trotskyites such valuable material
for provocation, for kindling the flames ·of war, for the foulest
crimes of fascism. Nobody is so able to mask himself as they are.
Nobody has mastered the art of cynical double-dealing to such a
degree as they have.
The contemptible, treacherous, bandit activity of the Bukharins, Yagodas, Krestinskys, Rykovs and other Rights and Trotskyites is now exposed to the whole world. They sold their country,
traded in the military secrets of its defence, were spies, diversionists, wreckers, murderers, thieves-and all in order to help the
fascist governments to overthrow the Soviet government, to overthrow the power of the workers and peasants, to restore the power
of the capitalists and landlords, to dismember the country of the
Soviet people, to wrest away the national republics and turn
them into colonies of the imperialists.
Such were the orders of their masters, which they fulfilled as
best they could, exerting all their strength in doing so.
They strove with all their strength to set fire to our native home
from all sides; they ·were in a hurry to open the gates to the
enemy so as to clutch at power, even at the price of judaslike betrayal, so as to destroy the fruits of the heroic labour
of our people who have built up the new, the Socialist society,
so as to bring ·back the power of the landowners and capitalists, for whom these traitors worked tirelessly.
Such are these people, such are their plans and calculations,
such are their shameful and monstrous crimes.
The accused Bukharin made the boastful statement here that
it :was they, the 'Rights, the menials of the capitalists who armed
631

Trotskyism with the "spiritual" weapon of the theory of the
restoration of capitalism.
Of what "theory" does Bukharin speak-this hardened political
swindler and one of the leading organizers of foreign espionage
against the U.S.S.R.?
Bukharin shrinks from the admission of his guilt as the devil
from incense. Bukharin denies his guilt here.
But what is his denial of this crime worth in the light of his
admission that he is guilty of other most serious crimes organically
bound with this crime?
What is this denial worth in the light of the evidence we have
against Bukharin?
I would only remind you that at the morn.ing session on March 7,
Bukharin and Rykov were shown to be fully guilty of espionage
connections and of conducting espionage work for the German
and Polish intelligence services. I would briefly call to mind my
dialogue with Rykov at the morning session on March 7.
At the investigation Rykov had stated:
"Chervyakov developed exceptionally active work in
Byelorussia. In his relations with the Poles, he and those
connected with him in illegal activity drew all the practical
conclusions from these directions of ours."
Rykov confirmed this in Court as well. He was asked in Court
by the State Prosecutor:
"Consequently, Chervyakov and the people connected with
you maintained systematic connections with the Poles?
"RYKOV: Yes:
"QUESTION: What kind of connection is it?
"RYKOV: There was an espionage connection there, too.
"QUESTION: But was there an espionage connection
maintained by a part of your organization with the Poles
on your instructions?
"RYKOV: Of course.
"QUESTION: Bukharin included?
"RYKOV: Of course.
"QUESTION: Were you and Bukharin connected?
"RYKOV: Absolutely.
"QUESTION: So you were spies?
"RYKOV: (No reply.)
"QUESTION: And the organizers of espionage?
"RYKOV: I am in no way better than a spy .
. "QUESTION: You organized espionage, so you were
spies.
"RYKOV: It may be said, yes."
But Bukharin under these conditions speaks of some sort of

632

''theory" in an attempt to give a "theoretical" explanation of
the course of events that led the Rights into the camp of the sworn
enemies. of the Soviet power and the Soviet people ....
There is no point in seeking for these explanations in Bukharin's "theory." They must be sought in Bukharin's crimes even
though they be cloaked in something like a "theory."
It is just these crimes that explain the real course of developments, the real logic of the events and the struggle that brought two
worlds face to face, two blocs-the bloc of traitors, hirelings of
foreign capital, now exposed and crushed by the wrath and might
of the great Soviet country, the bloc of betrayers covered with
eternal contempt, shame and condemnation of millions of working people throughout the world-and the bloc of Soviet patriots,
great and invincible in their love for their country, patriots who
have won more than one historic battle over their enemies, ready
under the leadership of the Communist Party and the great Stalin
to give a crushing rebuff to any enemy, under any conditions, at
any time, whatever the point from which he may appear, despite
all treachery, despite all betrayal.
It goes without saying that the significance of the present
trial is also determined by the lessons which must inevitably be
drawn from it by all of us, patriots of the Soviet land.
Our country enjoys the happiness of the victory of Socialism,
the happiness and joy of labour delivered from the yoke of capitalism.
For twenty years the Soviet state,· the Socialist state of workers
-and peasants, has stood like an indestructible rock.
For twenty years the great land of victorious Socialism has
been the scene of the heroic work of the organization of a new
social and state system, free of exploitation, free of the misery
and suffering of the millions of people enslaved by the yoke of
capitalism in almost all the remaining countries ·of the world.
For twenty years there has been going on unswervingly and
persistently the harmonious work of the numerous peoples united
'in the fraternal Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, built by
the genius of the leaders of the Socialist revolution, Lenin
and Stalin.
· In these twenty years the once poor and weak country has become a rich and mighty country, a powerful and invincible country.
In these twenty years the Russian state has become a Socia list state.
At the Extraordinary Eighth Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S. R.,
-which adopted the great Stalinist Constitution, Comrade Stalin
said:
"Our Soviet society has already, in the main, succeeded
in achieving Socialism; it has created a Socialist system,

633

L e., it has brought about what Marxists in other words call
the first, or lower phase of Communism. Hence, in the main,
we have already achieved the first phase of Communism,
Socialism. The fundamental principle of this phase of Communism is, as you know, the formula: 'from each according
to his ability, to each according to his work.' "
In these twenty years, under the leadership of the Party of
Lenin and Stalin, our country has attained the final abolition of
the exploitation of man by man, the final assertion of public,
Socialist property as the firm basis of our Soviet society.
In these twenty years, the whole aspect of our country has
undergone a radical change; it has become a rich and mighty proletarian power.
"As a result of all these changes in the sphere of the national economy of the U.S.S.R.," says Comrade Stalin, "we
now have a new, Socialist economy, which knows neither
crises nor unemployment, which knows neither poverty nor
ruin, and which provides citizens with every opportunity to
lead a prosperous and cultured life."
Socialism has become part of the everyday life of our people,
Socialism has emerged victorious in our country. And there is
no force on earth capable of weakening the significance or the
grandeur of this Socialist victory. And this despite all the difficulties that have stood and that still stand in our path. And this
despite all the efforts made by the foreign powers hostile to us
and by the remnants of exploiting classes in our country, which
have lived their day and are dying out, to hold back the progressive development of our society, to hinder our Socialist successes,
to disrupt our peaceful creative work of building Socialism in the
U.S.S.R.
It can be said without any exaggeration whatsoever that in
the past twenty years of Soviet history our state and our people
have not lived through a single year, month or day when we have
not been attacked by enemies-furious, insidious, brutal and
seeking revenge for defeats suffered by them at the hands of our
workers and peasants, seeking revenge for the "lost paradise" of
their economic and political domination.
From the very first days of the Great October ·Revolution
up to the brilliant days of the greatest epoch in history-the
epoch of the Stalinist Constitution-the young Republic of Soviets
has not emerged from the fire of class attacks by the exploiters
and their numerous agents, the Trotskyites, Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries, Bukharinites, Zinovievites, Mussavatists, Dashnaks, Georgian, Uzbel< and other nationalists, members of the
"Black Hundreds/' Whiteguards, Cadets, priests, kulaks, etc.,
etc.

This trial has reminded us once again, and has 'done so with
unprecedented force and acuteness, that two worlds face each other
as irreconcilable and deadly enemies-the world of capitalism and
the world of Socialism.
The logic of class contradictions and of the class struggle urges
the remnants of the exploiting classes within the U.S.S.R. and
the exploiting classes beyond its bounds to undertake more and
more furious attacks against the state of working people, which
is paving a brnad highway towards a better, a new life for the working people and the oppressed nations of the entire world.
Lenin and Stalin, our teachers, have on more than one occasion
pointed to the danger represented by the capitalist encirclement
to the cause of Socialism in the U.S.S.R.
At the Eighth Congress of the R.C.P. (Bolsheviks), in March
1919, Lenin said:
"We are living not merely in ·a state, but in a system of
states, and the existence of the Soviet Republic side by side
with imperialist states for a long time is unthinkable. One
or the other must triumph in the end. And before that end
supervenes, a series of frightful collisions between the Soviet
Republic and the bourgeois states is inevitable." (Collected
Works, Vol. XXIV, p. 122.)
"We must remember," Lenin taught us, "that we are at all
times but a hair's breadth from invasion." (Collected Works,
Vol. XXVII, p. 117.)
just recently Comrade Stalin once again reminded us of this
capitalist encirclement.
"Indeed," wrote Comrade Stalin in his historic reply to
Comrade Ivanov, "it would be r~diculous and stupid to close
our eyes to the capitalist encirclement and to think that our
external enemies, the fascists, for example, will not, if the
opportunity arises, make an attempt at an armed attack
upon the U.S.S.R. Only blind braggarts or masked enemie5
who desire to lull the vigilance of our people can think like
that. No less ridiculous would it be to deny that in the event
of the slightest success of military intervention, the interventionists would try to destroy the Soviet system in the
districts they occupied and restore the bourgeois system.
Did not Denikin or Kolchak restore the bourgeois system
in the districts they occupied? Are the fascists any better
than Denikin or Kolchak? Only blockheads or masked enemies
who with their boastfulness want to conceal their hostility
. and are striving to demobilize the people can deny the danger
of military intervention and of attempts at restoration as
long as the capitalist encirclement exists."
Over a number of years our enemies placed their hopes upon
635

successful intervention; they organized and inspired various antiSoviet groups in the U.S.S.R. to struggle against the Soviet power,
calculating on being able with the aid of these groups to carry
through their predatory designs.
The entire history of bourgeois counter-revolution in the
U.S.S. R. is linked up with the active attempts of the most reactionary circles of the international bourgeoisie to overthrow the
power of the Soviets. There has not been a single more or less serious
plot against the Soviet power in the U.S.S.R. without the direct and
most active participation of foreign capitalists and military cliques.
In 1921 Lenin warned us:
"We are surrounded by the world bourgeoisie, which watches every minute of vacillation in order to bring back 'its
own,' to reinstate the landlords and bourgeois_ie." (Collected
Works, Vol. XXVI, p. 348.)
Comrade Stalin is tireless in reminding us of the danger of the
capitalist encirclement, he proves that "the resistance of the dying
classes in our country does not take place in isolation from the
outside world, but finds support from the capitalist encirclement."
("Problems of Leninism," p. 386.)
Was not the famous Shakhty case proof of this? There the main
directing role belonged to Polish-French-German capitalists, who
had united with the wreckers in the struggle against the U.S.S.R.
Were not the Polish manufacturer Dvorzhanchik, the French
shareholders Sanset, Remaux, and Bourose, the German AEG
and the military in a number of capitalist countries who supported the first, second and third-were not all of these the inspirers of
the Shakhty conspiracy, which aimed, together with the foreign
General Staffs, at drowning our land in blood in 1928?
Was not the well-known "Industrial Party" case proof of this,
where, side by side with Ramzin and Charnovsky, first fiddle was
played by the Whiteguard emigres Ryabushinsky and General Lukomsky, by the British intelligence service man Colonel Lawrence
and the French General joinville, well-known participant of the
Northern intervention in 1919 and military attache at Kolchak 's
headquarters?
It is a known fact that those implicated in the Shakhty trial
and in the trial of the "Industrial Party" not only engaged in
wrecking work and prepared acts of diversion in case of war, but
systematically conducted espionage work, and, as the "Industrial
Party" trial disclosed, Ramzin even organized, for the conduct
of this espionage work, a special commission under the chairmanship of the wrecker Professor Osadchy, at that time assistant chairman of the State Planning Commission. The program of the "Industrial Party" focussed attention on the perpetrating of acts of
diversion in Moscow, Leningrad, the Donbas and the Urals by

636

resorting to the blowing up of bridges, the damaging of railways,
the blowing up of electric power stations, the stoppage of factories and mills.
Was not the devilish work of the foreign intelligence services
in our country also shown by the trial of the British engineers
Thornton, MacDonald and others, who were exposed in 1933 as
agents of the Intelligence Service, as organizers of wrecking activities and acts of diversion at certain of our electric power stations,
as people who were preparing bases for the coming intervention?
Finally, has this not been proved also by the recent trials of
1936 and 1937, which exposed the monstrous crimes of the espionage and terrorist gangs of Trotskyites, Zinovievites and other
anti-Soviet elements who enrolled in the service of foreign police
Okhranas and became espionage, diversionist and terrorist agencies of Okhranas? Yes, yes. The ghastly crimes of these bandit
gangs destroyed by the verdicts of our Soviet Court cry out
aloud and provide absolutely convincing proof of this.
The Zinoviev-Kamenev trial, the Pyatakov-Radek trial, the
trial of the group of military traitors Tukhachevsky, Yakir and
others, have proved that our enemies do not intend quietly to
"creep into Social ism, " as the accused Bukharin, Rykov and
their like preached in order to mask their vile treacherous work,
but that our enemies resort to the most extreme, most ferocious
means of struggle.
This has also been completely proved by the present trial, in
which the chief "heroes" are the organizers and inspirers of the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," exposed as inveterate enemies
of Socialism, of our country, of our people.
That is why the importance of this trial goes far beyond its
0rdinary, so to speak, criminal bounds and assumes really tremendous historic significance.
This trial sums up the results of the struggle against the Soviet state and the Party of Lenin-Stalin waged by people who,
as has with exceptional clarity and conviction been proved by
the Court proceedings, spent the whole of their lives behind
masks, people who began this struggle long before the present time,
who under cover of the loud phrases of provocateurs served not the
revolution and the proletariat, but the counter-revolution and the
bourgeoisie, who deceived the Party and the Soviet government
in order the more conveniently to do their black work oftreachery 1
in order the longer to remain undiscovered.
By means of deception, hypocrisy and double-dealing these
detestable criminals succeeded in postponing the hour of their
exposure until very recently. But this hour has arrived, and the
criminals stand exposed, exposed completely and to the end.
In the light of the facts .established at this trial, the entire crim637

inal work of the Trotskyites and Bukharinites, who employed
a cunning guise to hide their real countenance of sworn enemies of
the Soviet people, becomes clear and comprehensible. . . .
Their mask has been torn off. Their true colours, their real face
are now clear for all to see; their shameful deeds are also clear to
all, just as is their miserable and shameful fate.
The trials of Zinoviev and Kamenev and of Pyatakov and Radek
completed the exposure of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite scum of
humanity as a rabid and unprincipled band of wreckers, diversionists, spies and assassins, acting on instructions of the intelligence
services of foreign powers.
The 1937 trial, where the Trotskyite ringleaders Pyatakov,
Radek, Sokolnikov and others were in the dock, exposed the political platform of the Trotskyites despite the fact that they stubbornly hid it from the people.
And how could they do other than hide this platform of theirs,
woven as it was of treachery, betrayal and perfidy, and subordinated to the one task of ensuring the overthrow of the Soviet power
and the restoration of capitalism in the U.S .. S.R.?
The present trial has shown that this "program," if you please,
was copied by the Trotskyites from the Rights, a point stressed
in Court, not without boasting, by the accused Bukharin.
The present trial has completely and utterly exposed as fascist
agents not only the Trotskyites, but also the Bukharinites, who
cunningly camouflaged themselves over a lengthy period of time,
and cunningly avoided being exposed as murderers, spies and provocateurs.
It is now clear to all and sundry what the Rights are, who,
like the Trotskyites, long ago ceased to be a political trend, and,
like Trotskyism, degenerated into a rabid and desperate gang of
felonious criminals.
The entire process of their degeneration into a counter-revolutionary gang, a degeneration that began long ago and was repeatedly exposed by our Party and Comrade Stalin personally, has
been completely revealed.
We shall yet dwell specially on the crimes of the accused Bukharin in the year 1918; now we shall mention them only in order
in the light of these crimes the better and more graphically to see
the path of this degeneration.
And really, could Bukharin, having begun in 1918 with the
plot against Lenin as head of the Soviet state, having raised his
criminal hand against Lenin in 1918, end in any other way than
he has done now, in the shameful prisoners' dock, awaiting the
severe but just sentence of the Soviet people, who now pronounce
this hated name with imprecations?
Having begun with the quack "theory" of the peaceful growth
638

of the kulaks into Socialism, and having, during all these last tert
years, conducted an underground struggle against the Party and
the Soviet people, could Bukharin end his political career in any
other way than he is doing now, grimacing and playing the buffoon
even now on the threshold of what is perhaps his last hour, the
hour of his death?
It was not by chance that Bukharin, Rykov, Yagoda and the
other Rights came to the espionage bloc with the Trotskyites.
There was nothing unexpected in the fact that such a bloc was constituted and at last, in 1932, took final shape; the entire development of the relations between the Rights and the Trotskyites, who
at bottom constitute varieties of one and the same phenomenon,
led towards this.
At the Sixteenth Party Congress, in 1930, Comrade Stalin, exposing the duality of Trotskyism, pointed out that this duality . . .
"explains the fact that Trotskyism "(masked capitulation)" usually
crowns its 'furious' attacks upon the Right deviators by entering
into a bloc with these capitulators without masks."
The Trotskyites and Rights are capitulators. The former are
capitulators behind the mask of hysterical, provocative, "revolutionary" phrases, while the others are capitulators without masks.
At the Seventeenth Party Conference, in his report on the Second Five-Year Plan, Comrade Molotov showed the complete kinship of souls of the Rights and the Trotskyites. The Trotskyites
came forward with slanderous counter-theses against the First
Five-Year Plan. They were· echoed by the Rights, who countered
Stalin's Five-Year Plan with Rykov's Two-Year Plan.
The Trotskyites spread slander about the growth of the kulak
elements and about the dependence on them of the state economy
of the U.S.S.R. Day in and day out, the Rights whined that "for
a long time to come the main source of grain will be the individual
peasant farms" (i.e., kulak farms) "and therefore go slow with
the offensive on the kulaks."
The Trotskyites spat slander about "Thermidor," i.e., about
the collapse of our revolution. The Rights echoed them and whined
that our industrial plants and factories would soon fall into the
hands of the Whiteguards. True, the Rights occasionally fought
the Trotskyites, but, as Comrade Stalin has already pointed out,
these were "cock-fights"which "the Right deviators usually crown
with backstage negotiations for a bloc with the Trotskyites.,,
("Problems of Leninism," p. 421.)
And so from year to year, throughout the whole duration of
our revolution, throughout the whole of the existence of the Soviet state.
Wherein lies the explanation of this kinship of the positions
·of the Trotskyites and the Rights, of their constant attraction one
639

for the other, of their constant search for blocs, and, finally, of
the existence of these blocs at the various stages of their struggle
against the Party, the Soviet state and Socialist construction?
The explanation, of course, lies above all in the common nature
of the social base of the Trotskyites and the Rights. It lies in the
fact that both the Trotskyites and the Rights reflect the pressure
of the capitalist elements resisting the successes of Socialism, with
no intention of departing peacefully and quietly from the historical stage.
The explanation lies, as we now know, in the fact that both
were acting on the orders of the very same masters, installed in
the General Staffs and intelligence services of foreign powers
hostile to the U.S.S.R.
The Trotskyites and Bukharinites found their way into the camp
of counter-revolution many years ago. Trotskyisrn and the Rights
turned many years ago into the armour-bearers of bourgeois
counter-revolution. For many years already the Trotskyites and
Rights have been supplying the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie
with weapons for the struggle against the Soviet state. The
Trotskyites and Rights have engaged in one and the same dark
work of treachery.
These are the facts which now assume a new meaning in the
light of the circumstances that have now been established, completely and with absolute authenticity, at the Court proceedings
in the present case.
The facts establish with absolute incontrovertibility both the
inevitable and natural character of the bloc concluded between the
Rights and the Trotskyites and the degeneration of this bloc
into an agency of foreign fascist intelligence services.
The way the Trotskyites and Zinovievites fought against Lenin,
against Socialism, against the heroic efforts of the proletarian revolution to build a new Socialist society in the U.S.S.R. was shown
with exhaustive completeness by the examples of Pyatakov,
Zinoviev, Kamenev, Radek, Smirnov and others at the two preceding trials.
I would now like to remind you of certain facts which characterize from this angle the position and behaviour of some of the
heroes of the present trial, and primarily of the accused Bukharin
and Rykov.
As I have already said, Bukharin likes to picture himself as
a "theoretician," aye, and a Marxist too, and of the most orthodox kind to boot. But the actual state of affairs may be seen from
the following brief historical review of the anti-Party activity of
Bukharin from 1909 to 1936 inclusive.
Here are several brief data.
The year 1909-Bukharin adhered to the position of "0tzovism,'
640

'fhe years 1914-1917 (the period of the imperialist war)-Bukllarin was a "Left Communist," rejected the minimum program,'
and waged a struggle again.st Lenin.
The year 1914-he was fussing about a plan for publishing his
own paper, as against the Bolshevik press, the .Leninist press.
The spring of 1915-Bukharin was a Trotskyite. At the Berne
Conference he opposed the slogan of civil war, and advocated
unity with the Trotskyite-Menshevik "Nashe Slovo." Lenin wrote
the article "About the National Pride of the Great Russians,"
which Bukharin treated as a man.ifestation of social-patriotism.
The autumn of 1915-Bukharin came forward with theses
rejecting the right of nations to self-determination.
February 1916-Bukharin endorsed the semi-anarchist program
of the Dutch Left Social-Democrats.
In 1916 Bukharin expressed anarchist, anti-Leninist views
in the magazine "The Youth International" ·on the problem of
the state, against the dictatorship of the proletariat.
In an article entitled ••World Economy and Imperialism"
(1915), Bukharin openly defended the Trotskyite thesis that isolated actions by the proletariat of individual countries could not
result in victory. In other words, as Lenin stated, the Bukharins
were postponing Socialism . . . "to the Greek Calends, i.e., forever." (Collected Works, Vol. XIX, p. 221.) Vladimir Ilyich wrote
of him in 1916 that he-Bukharin-was "(1) credulous towards
gossip and (2) devilishly unstable in politics." (Collected Works,
Vol. XXIX, p. 229.)
"The war," wrote Lenin, "spurred him on to semi-anarchist
"ideas. At the Conference that adopted the Berne Resolutions (spring
of 1915) he produced theses
the acme of absurdity; a disgrace;
semi-anarchism."
In 1916, as I have already stated, Bukharin, in "The Youth International" magazine, developed anarcho-syndicalist ideas about
the proletariat's hostility in principle to the state, the necessity
to blow up any state whatsoever.
Subsequently, a year after the death of V. I. Lenin, Bukharin
came forward with the brazen assertion that not he, Bukharin,
had been wrong on this question, but Lenin.
The years 1916-17-Bukharin, together with Trotsky, edited
the Trotskyite paper "'Novy Mir" in New York, in which .he
denied the possibility of the victory of Socialism in a single country.
The year 1917-at the Sixth Congress of the Party, Bukharin came
forward with a Trotskyite scheme. During the October days he again
and again advocated the idea of the impossibility of the victory of
Socialism in Russia.
·
4

41

••

641

The year 1918-Bukharin was the leader of "Left Communism.' 1
This episode has been most carefully examined at this trial.
On October 8, 1918, Bukharin made a statement at the Plenum
of the Moscow Soviet to the effect that his "Left Communism"
had been a mistake. "In my time I was against the Brest-Litovsk
Peace, but never advocated the disruption of peace, as the 'Left'
Socialist-Revolutionaries did. I now must make the honest and
open admission that we opponents of the Brest-Litovsk Peace were
wrong, while Lenin was right." We know-and Bukharin has had
to admit this at the trial-that in actual fact he carried on an
active struggle to disrupt the Brest-Litovsk Peace.
The year 1919-at the Eighth Congress of the Party, Bukharin
again opposed the recognition .of the right of nations to selfdetermination.
Then followed the Ninth and Tenth Congresses of the Party.
where Bukharin invariably pursued his ••own" line directed against
the Party, against Lenin, against Stalin.
In 1921, in the interests of Trotsky, Bukharin adopted the
position of buffer, treacherously fanning the flame of the discussion, and, to use Lenin's expression, pouring "buffer oil" on it.
Bukharin joined Serebryakov, Radek, Krestinsky, Pyatakov
and other Trotskyites in the anti-Lenin faction.
At the end of 1920 and the beginning of 1921 there took place
the discussion on the trade unions. The country was preparing for
the transition to the New Economic Policy. Bukharin assumed the
role of "buffer," then passed over completely to Trotsky's position. And at the Tenth Congress he declared that "the Republic
hangs by a thread.''
In 1923 Bukharin wrote an article in the "Pravda" entitled
"Down with Factionalism," in which he spoke of Trotsky's errors, and vaguely of those of "a number of other comrades," while
keeping silent regarding himself.
In 1922 Lenin was battering Bukharin for his attempt to
disrupt the monopoly of foreign trade. Lenin bluntly exposed
Bukharin as a profiteer, a petty-bourgeois, as a defender of the interests of the kulak upper stratum of the peasantry, opposing the
industrial proletariat. (Collected Works, Vol. XXVII, p. 381.)
In 1923-24 Bukharin formed a bloc with Kamenev and Zinoviev against Comrade Stalin. On the eve of the discussion Bukharin published an article in which he propagated in a veiled form
the theory of the kulaks growing into Socialism.
The year 1925-Bukharin's kulak slogan of "enrich yourselves."
True, in his booklet "Caesarism Behind the Mask of Revolution" and
at the. Fourteenth Party Congress, Bukharin admitted the erroneousness of this slogan, but here in Court Bukharin has admitted

642

that this "repentanceH was nothing but a tactical manoeuvre,
a fraud.
·
The year 1928-Bukharin declared atthe Plenum of the Central
Committee of the Party that he had no differences with the Party,
and at the same time engaged in n.egotiations and reached a
secret understanding with Kamenev. He wrote the "Notes of
an Economist."
The year 1929-Bukharin made a declaration in "Pravda"
regarding the erroneousness of his views. "While admitting these
errors of ours, we on our part wi 11 exert every effort to wage, together
with the entire Party, a resolute struggle against all deviations."
Now in Court he has testified that this was also a tactical
manoeuvre, that at that time, in 1929, he was also lying. For it
was precisely at that time that there was taking shape the underground organization that began, with arms in hand, to oppose
the Soviet power.
To avoid unfounded statements, I will remind you of the
testimony of Bukharin, Rykov and finally Ivanov as to how
Bukharin was fanning the struggle in the North Caucasus, how
through his disciple and henchman in thi.s affair, Slepkov, he organized kulak uprisings against the 8-0viet power, how he sent
Yakovenko to Siberia, how they all succeeded in provoking a
kulak uprising in the Biisk area and other places. I will remind
you that at that very time Bukharin wrote to the press stating
that "we will exert every effort to wage together with the entire
Party a resolute struggle against all deviations." Bukharin
lied here as well.
On December 15, 1929, Bukharin published an article in
"Pravda" at the end of which he enumerated' and condemned
his errors. And at the same time he was conducting secret negotiations with Kamenev.
At tlie same time, as he has himself admitted here; he joined
with Rykov in sending Slepkov to. the North Caucasus and Yakovenko to Siberia to rouse kulak uprisings against the Soviet power.
In Court Bukharin has admitted that it was they who at that time
provoked such-and-such kulak uprisings.
And how did Bukharin behave then?
With the hypocritical mien of a Pharisee, and hiding behind a
mask of sincerity, Bukharin began at the very outset of the struggle
to engage in base intrigues, secret factional machinations against
the Party and its leadership. He concluded a bloc with the worst
enemies of Bolshevism, who have been exposed, who had but
shortly before, in November 1927, undertaken a hostile dern?nstrationagainst the Soviet power in the streets of Moscow and Lemngrad.
In 1930 Bukharin again handed in a declaration to the Central
Committee and admitted his errors. Bukharin wrote about his "un41*

643

reserved condemnation of every attempt against the unity of
the Party, all factional activity, all attempts at surreptitious
struggle against the Party leadership, surreptitious defence of
another political line differing from that of the Party." But
in actual fact, as you have heard from Bukharin's testimony, it
was precisely at this moment that he was engaged in negotiations
with Semyonov regarding the organization of a terrorist act against
the leaders of our Party and government.
In January 1933 Bukharin made a speech at the Joint Plenum
of the Central Committee and the Central Control Commission
of the C.P.S.U. (Bolsheviks) (see "Pravda," No. 14), in which
he demanded "severe punishment of A. P. Smirnov's grouping,"
spoke of his own "Right opportunist. absolutely wrong general
political line," of his "gui It before the Party, its leadership, before
the Central Committee of the Party, before the working class and
the country," spoke of Tomsky and Rykov as of his "former
companions in the leadership of the Right opposition." In general
he "criticized" his "former" views.
In actual fact, however, this was the first year of the fonnation of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," which proceeded
to fulfil such tasks as terrorism, espionage, diversion, wrecking,
and high treason, the wresting of the national republics from
the U.S.S.R.
The beginning of 1934. The Seventeenth Party CongressBukharin's speech in which he approved of the "ruthless crushing
of all oppositions and of the Right opposition as the main danger,
i.e., of the very group to which I once belonged."
And at the same time he was mobilizing all forces in order
to intensify the criminal activity of his group, which had already
degenerated into a group of genuine spies, murderers, and intelligence service agents.
The beginning of 1936-in an article in the" Izvestia" Bukharin
dubbed the Russian people a "nation of Oblomovs.,, In the issue
of the "Izvestia" dated February 14, 1936, Bukharin declared
that this assertion of his was erroneous. ("The assertion is wrong,,,
and "I express my profound regret" at this.)
Such is Bukharin, this hypocritical, false, wily creature; this
piously rapacious and respectfully malicious person, this "damnable cross of a fox and a swine," to use Maxim Gorky's words
about one of the heroes from the gallery of "Those Who Once
Were People.,,
Neither are the others-also ''heroes"-any better.
'rake the accused Rykov.
Prior to joining the Bolshevik Party. Rykov was a member
of the united ~rty of Socialist~Revolutionaries and Social-Democrats in Saratov.
644

The ~years 1909-11-Rykov was a semi-Trotskyite, a serniLiquidator. In the period of the April Conference, Rykov and
Kamenev advocated the unification of the "live forces" of
revolutionary democracy, i.e., an alliance with the SocialistRevolutionaries and Mensheviks.
In October 1917 Rykov, together with Kamenev and Zinoviev,
turned deserter.
In December 1917 Rykov croaked about the instability of the
Soviet power and declared that "a purely Bolshevik government
cannot maintain itself in a backward country while the Socialist
revolution has not taken place in Europe."
In 1920 Rykov joined the Sapronovites in opposing Lenin,
and in defending collegiate responsibility.
Rykov was against Lenin's GOELRO plan, he sank with
his h~ad in philistine "realism," sank to the ears in routine (as Comrade Stalin wrote at the time about him to
V. I. Lenin).
And later? Later there was 1928, 1929, 1932-blocs, centres,
plots, betrayals.
The other accused are no better.
Her~ we have the old Trotskyite and German spy Krestinsky,
who began his career of treason while Vladimir llyich Lenin
was still alive. Krestinsky passed on espionage information to
the German intelligence service and annual1y received 250,000
gold marks from the German Reichswehr for the underground
work of the Trotskyites.
Here we have an equally inveterate Trotskyite, Rosengoltz,
who became a German spy in 1923 and a British spy in 1926.
These are the people who, together with Trotsky, Pyatakov,
Yagoda, Bukharin and Rykov, were the chief ringleaders of this
bloc, this "centre of centres" of all the an.ti-Soviet fascist forces
in our country.
I consider it necessary to deal briefly with the investigation
that took place here of .the circumstances of the plot against Vladimir Ilyich Lenin in 1918.
Both at th~ preliminary investigation and in Court Bukharin
was doing everything to wriggle out of the events of 1918, to evade
his· responsibility betore history, before the working class, before
al\ honest mankind for the monstrous crime organized and partly
committed by Bukharin, together with the "Left" and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, together with Trotsky and his group.
Bukharin lied disgracefully in October 1918, when he disowned
the "Left Communists." Bukharin lied disgracefully in 1924 as
well, when under the pressure of circumstances he raised a tiny
corner of the curtain that concealed from us the real truth about
this· beinous and ghastly crime.

045

Bukharin lied, for example, in 1924 when he denied the existence of a bloc between him~elf and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries in HHS.
Bukharin does not tell the truth here, in Court, either when
he tries to deny facts that have been corroborated here by a number of witnesses.
Yet these facts are extremely important both for finally exposing the treacherous countenance of Bukharin and for the most
complete and correct understanding of all the subsequent criminal
activities of Bukharin and his accomplices, the Bukharinites.
One must recall the facts, the situation and the conditions
of the year 1918in order properly to evaluate the entire profundity
of the fiendish crime of Trotsky and Bukharin against the Revolution, the entire abyss of their treachery! . . .
These facts, Comrades judges, are now, of course, to a con
siderable extent a matter of history. But they throw full light
on the question that interests us, that interests many, and particularly those who are not yet versed in Bukharin's past and in
the past of the anti-Soviet groups, namely, how could it· happen
that Bukharin and Rykov, who for so many years posed as adherents of Socialism, as adherents of the Socialist struggle, proved
to belong to the camp of the most inveterate enemies of the
Soviet power, to the camp of traitors to and betrayers of the
revolution, of the Soviet people and the fatherland.
In the light of the present trial, these facts, already covered
with the dust of archives, again revive and begin to speak in
the loud voice of an impeacher demanding that the culprits be
called to account, if not before a criminal Court restricted by
the Statutes_ of limitation, then, at any rate, before the tribunal of history which knows of no Statutes of limitation,
which knows no mercy.
The year 1918-the young Soviet Republic was exerting
its entire strength to overcome the gigantic difficulties thaf had
arisen in its path toward the assertion and consolidation of the
victory of the Socialist revolution.
In those days the country was literally thrown into dust. It
had to be raised to the level of new, supreme historic tasks previously unknown by any revolution of working people.
"From the period of triumphal processions,,, said
V. I. Lenin on this subject, "we had to pass to the period of
an extraordinarily difficult and severe position, which could
not be brushed aside with words, with. brilliant sloganshowever pleasant that would have been-because in our
disturbed country we had incredibly weary masses who had
~eached a state in which they could not ·pos.sibly go on fightrng; they had been so utterly broken up by three years of

646

agonizing war that they were rendered utterly useless from
a military point of view." (Collected Works, Vol. XXII, p.
318.)

In these conditions the struggle for peace was a struggle for
the entire future of the proletarian revolution, the fate of which
was literally at stake.
In these conditions the question of war or peace in essence
amounted to the one question of whether the Soviet power, the
Soviet state, the Land of Soviets, was to be or not to be.
Lenin's brilliant strategy gave a positive solution of this
problem. History confirmed the correctness of this solution. It
declared: "To be.''
Leninism teaches not only the art of advance, but also the art
of retreat.
"· .. One cannot win," Lenin wrote, "without having
learned both how to attack and how to retreat correctly."
(Collected Works, Vol. XXV, p. 177.)
Comrade Stalin said in this connection:
"The object of this strategy is to gain time, to disintegrate the enemy and to accumulate forces in order to assume
the offensive J,ater.
"The signing of the Brest-Litovsk Peace may be taken as
a model of this strategy, for it enabled the Party to gain
time, to make use of the conflicts in the camp of the imperialists, to disintegrate the forces of the enemy, to retain
the support of the peasantry and accumulate forces in preparation for the attacks upon Kolchak and Denikin." ("Problems of Leninism,,, pp. 56-57.)
This strategy, the brilliant strategy of Lenin and Stalin, was
completely justified. It saved the. new Russia and the Soviet
power from inevitable doom.
In 1924, Comrade Stalin_ in this connection reminded us:
"'Now even the biggest fool,' said Lenin three years after
the Brest-Litovsk Peace, 'sees that the "Brest Peace"
was a concession that strengthened us and broke up the forces
of international imperialism.' " ("Problems of Leninism,"
p. 57.)
.
.
.
It is well known that Trotsky and Bukharin, along with their
adherents, did everything possible to disrupt the Brest-Litovsk
Peace.
Trotsky and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries behaved
like agents-provocateurs during the negotiations with General
Hoffmann. The ".Left Communists," headed by Bukharin, raved
about the peace policy of the Soviet government, at the head of
which stood Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, and demanded that negotiations be broken offand that a "revolutionary war" be declared.

647

By their trenchant but at bottom provocateur speeches and
slogans. the Bukharinites and Trotskyites tried to divert our
Party from the Leninist path.
"'Neither peace nor war!' 'A holy war against the world
bourgeoisie!'-such and similar provocateur slogans were issued by the Trotskys, Bukharins and their like," as Comrade
Voroshilov said in his speech on the occasion of the twentieth
anniversary of the Workers' and Peasants' Red Army and
Navy, "with the sole purpose of involving our country in an
armed conflict with the imperialists at a moment when the
Soviet government still did not possess a strong army, and
in this way putting an end to the Soviet power and clearing
the way for the victory of the bourgeoisie and the complete
restoration of capitalism in our country."
Till now the Bukharinites succeeded in concealing from
history the truth regarding this point as well.
Even at the preliminary investigation, in testimony given on
June 2, 1937, Bukharin attempted to conceal the real character
of his struggle during the period of the Brest-Litovsk Peace against
Lenin as the head of the Soviet state.
Bukharin tried to evade this question and, as usual with him,
confined himself to general abstract utterances to the effect
that he allegedly "did not understand" that "the most concrete
of the most concrete questions about the 'moujik' was precisely
the question of giving the masses a 'breathing space,' and had
substituted for the vital needs of the moment his general literary
effusions about the proletarian fatherland having to be defended."
Bukharin's trick did not succeed. The investigating authorities did not fall into this trap. On the contrary, the investigation exposed Bukharin, and exposed him of much more serious
things than any "general literary effusions."
The investigation established, and I deem it necessary to
remind you of this here in its full scope, Comrades Judges, that
in 1918, immediately following the October Revolution, in the
period of the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace, Bukharin
and his group of so-called "Left Communists, .. and Trotsky with
his group, together with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries
organized a conspiracy against Lenin as the head of the Soviet
government.
Bukharin and the other conspirators, as can be seen from the
materials of the investigation, aimed at frustrating the BrestLitovsk Peace, overthrowing the Soviet government, arresting
and killing Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, and forming a new government made up of Bukharinites, who then for purposes of
camooflage called themselves "Left Communists," and of Trotskyites an<l "1..eft" Socialist-Revolutionaries.

648

During the preliminary invest1gation, Bukharin was confronted
with facts, was brought face to face with five people. And it was
then that the accused Bukharin recalled something more serious
than "general literary effusions." Bukharin, for example, recalled
such a fact as the bloc with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries
in 1918, with the aim of struggle against the Soviet government;
such a fact as a direct plot against the Soviet government, as preparations for the arrest of Lenin, for the arrest of Stalin and of
Sverdlov.
All of this, as you recall, was admitted by Bukharin. But he
did so grudgingly.
We remember the witnesses who gave evidence before the
Court, we well remember their evidence, we saw them, we heard
them. We remember how their words fell like heavy lead on
the head of Bukharin, the inspirer of the provocateur struggle
against Lenin's Council of People's Commissars-Bukharin,
who, as has been fully and clearly established by the Court investigation, had been the organizer of a plot and insurrection against
the Soviet state-the instigator of the assassination of the
leaders of the Soviet government, Comrades Lenin, Stalin and
Sverdlov.
I have every ground for saying-and I base myself upon
these facts-that all of this has been exactly ascertained, established with sufficient precision, and sufficiently proved.
Permit me to dwell briefly on the evidence that confirms the
correctness of this conclusion. You recall the testimony given here
by Kamkov. Kamkov was one of the foremost leaders of the Central
Committee of the Party of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
Kamkov testified that he had a conversation with Bukharin in
1918 on the question of the Brest-Litovsk Peace~ that the struggle
on this question, in Bukharin's words, was assuming extremely
acute forms. Bukharin told Karnkov of the acute forms of this
struggle, of the fact that among the "Left Communists" the question was being debated about the establishment of a new government. In this connection, said Kamkov, Bukharin mentioned
Pyatakov as a possible candidate for head of the new government, and stated that the change of government was proposed
to be effected by the arrest of the entire Soviet government,
headed by Lenin.
Bukharin did not deny this. True, he said something here
about arrest for "twenty-four hours." But this is not a serious
statement. As far back as in 1924, Bukharin, writing in the "Pravda," himself explained how real and serious was this plan to
arrest Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. But Bukharin disclaims the plan
to murder our leaders.
What proofs did he produce to justify himself on this

649

question? Nothing, except bare denial. He was exposed here by
Yakovleva, he was exposed by Ossinsky, he was exposed
by Mantsev, he was exposed by Karelin in the corresponding
and most essential part of the question, lhe was also exposed
by Kamkov, because, as you remember, Bukharin tried to
present even the question of the arrest in such a manner as if
the initiative came not from him, but from Kamkov, from the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. Kamkov testified here that the
initiative came from Bukharin. I am inclined however to reconcile
them, for the initiative apparently came from both of them. This
explains the furious struggle carried on by these people against the
Soviet government, against Lenin and against his companionsComrades Stalin and Sverdlov.
. Bukharin denies this. But one can11ot really accept an absolutely unfounded denial as a proof, all the more since this denial
runs contrary to the very logic of things.
Had this fact-the plan to kill Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlovnot existed, then why did Karelin, Yakovleva, Ossinsky,
Mantsev find it necessary to speak of thiS-people for whom the
admission of such a shameful and such a terrible fact, such
a monstrous crime against our country, is now of no advantage.
Yet. according to Karelin's testimony, Bukharin spoke bluntly about the physical destruction of Lenin and Stalin. Yakovleva
also says:
"Bukharin expressed to me the idea that the political
struggle was assuming ever more acute forms and that
matters could not be confined to the mere political formulation of lack of confidence in the Central Committee of
the Party. Bukharin declared that a change of leadership
was inevitable, and that in this connection the question
stood of arresting Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, and even
of their physical destruction." (Vol. XLIV, p. 77.)
This was also confirmed by Ossinsky, confirmed by Mantsev.
Bukharin was not alone. His viewpoint was shared, as has
now been established, by Trotsky as well, about whose role in
the plot against V. I. Lenin in 1918 we now have a series of testimonies at this trial, including the testimony of Bukharin himself.
"At that time,., testified the accused Bukharin, "the
idea again arose of a coup and the arrest of Lenin, Stalin and
Sverdlov as the dominant figures in the Party and Soviet
leadership. This time it arose on the initiative of Trotsky,
to whom the proposal of the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries
· apparently became known-through Pyatakov, I presume ...
'· (Vol. V, p. 124.)
Bukharin does not tell the whole story, and remains true to
his tactics of half-admissions.

But there are two witnesses, Yakovleva and Mantsev who on
this question as well speak-with ·such precision as allo~s of no
doubts as to the fairness and correctness of their testimony.
Are not these facts sufficient to permit one to say that the
conspiracy of the Bukharinites, Trotskyites and "Left" SocialistRevolutionaries in 1918 against Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov has
been proved to the hilt?
Bukharin himself has admitted the existence of this conspiracy; Bukh~rin hi~self has admitted the existence of a plan to
arrest Le nm, Stahn and Sverdlov. Bukharin only repudiates the
plan to murder Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov.
However, the accused Bukharin's first admission regarding
the plan for a coup, the plan for the arrest, essentially speaking, confirms also· what follows. Indeed, Bukharin admitted
that together with his group of "Left Communists," together with
Tr:otsky and his group, and together with the "Left" SocialistRevolutfonaries, they sought to bririg about the forcible overthrow
of the Soviet government, headed by Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov,
and even the arrest of Lenin, Stalin- and Sverdlov.
But does Bukharin know what forcible overthrow means?
Does Bukharin know .the meaning of arrests connected with the
task of forcible overthrow? Does Bukharin know that people embarking on a forcible overthrow and violent arrests are thereby embarking upon violence, are thereby embarking upon murder as well?
Forcible overthrow presupposes,· and does not exclude, such
a form of violence as physical extermination. Bukharin admits
forcible overthrow, but de_nies physical extermination. This is an
obvious falsity, an obvious absurdity; it is obviously illogical.But
Bukharin is in a position where one cannot demand logic of him.
The fads established in Court speak more authoritatively
and more convincingly tlian Bukharin imagines or desires. Bukharin, it is true, has now" said somewhat more than, for example,
in 1924, but nevertheless he has not said everything. This is not
the first time Bukharin acts in this way. In 1924, Bukharin told
something about lhis shameful crime, but only something.
In 1938, Bukharin, forced to the wall, was obliged to tell more
about this fact. If we want to estimate the degree of falsity,
jesuitry and hypocrisy of Bukharin, we have only to compare
the· text of the letter he published in the newspaper "Pravda" in
1924 with what he said during the pre~iminary investigation. He
·concealed a number of facts in this letter, he did not say that
there had been a plot, he did not say that there had been a direct
understanding between his group and Trotsky, he said nothing about
the murder of Lenin, nor yet about the murder of Stalin and Sverdlov. This has now been brought to light. This has now been exposed, ithasbeendivulged, ithasbeenestablished;the whole world

t)5t

has been informed of it, despite Bukharin's wishes, despite all
his resistance to the establishment of this fact. Bukharin admitted-and even so, as you saw during the trial, only half admitted
it and only because there was no way of escaping it-that in
1918 he had proclaimed that the Soviet power was a mere formality
and had proposed that it should be liquidated.
Lenin exposed the monstrosity of this "thesis" of Bukharin's,
pointing out among others the historical examples of France in
1793 and of Prussia in the beginning of the nineteenth century,
when the finest people of these countries, in the dark hours through
which their fatherland was passing, did not give way to despair, but
" . . . signed peace treaties immeasurably more onerous,
bestial, shameful and oppressive than the Treaty of BrestLitovsk; and then were able to endure, staunchly bore the
yoke of the conqueror, again fought, again fell beneath the
yoke of the conqueror, again signed indecent and most indecent peace treaties, again rose and finally emancipated
themselves (not without utilizing the differences between
the strongest of the competing conquerors)." (Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. XXII, p. 302.}
But these were the finest people of their country, and not
traitors and provocateurs, which the so-called "Left Communists"
and their friends from the underground actually proved to be.
But for this it was necessary, as Lenin taught, to love one's
country, one's people, and not vilify them, as Bukharin and his
henchmen do, rising against Lenin, who bade us love and respect
our people.
~-The trial has established the fact that in 1918 Bukhari~ ,and
Trotsky concluded a bloc with the Socialist-Revolutionaries for·the
purpose of waging a joint struggle against the Soviet govern~nt,
which was then headed by Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov,. tttarlhey
plotted an armed uprising and that they were prepared to arrest
and murder Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov.
Has this been proved, or not?
It has been proved completely. It has been proved by the
testimony of Bukharin himself and by the evidence of Yakovleva
and Karelin, Kamkov, Mantsev and Ossinsky.
Bukharin denies the preparations for assassination. But how
does he deny them? Comrades judges, I would request you, in
yo.ur confe_rence chamt>E:r~ !o examine the records of the appropnate session of our tnal m order to recall with complete clarity the method which Bukharin employed to deny this fact.
Here is the dialogue. Bukharin admits that he was one of the
organizers of this plot.
He is asked~ "Did you speak openly of the arrest of Lenin1

~in ~n<l Sv~dlov?"

652

1

•BUKHARIN: There was talk or arrest, but not o!
physical extermination. This was not in the period prior
to the Brest-Litovsk Peace, but after.... At that time I had
one conversation with Pyatakov, when Karelin and Kamkov
came and said that they proposed to set up a new
government. . . .
"Question: When was that?
"BUKHARIN: It was before the Brest-Litovsk Peace.
They proposed to form a government by arresting Lenin for
twenty-four hours.
"Question: And so we may say that prior to the conclusion of the Peace of Brest-Litovsk you had a conversation
with the 'Left' Socialist-Revolutionaries, Karelin and Kamkov,
about the formation of a new government, that is, by first
overthrowing the government headed by Lenin? Was there such
a conversation?
"BUKHARIN: There was.
"Question: About the arrest of Lenin?
"BUKHARIN: The Socialist-Revolutionaries spoke of
that.
"Question: As you put it, the Socialist-Revolutionaries
spoke about the arrest of Lenin; but the witness Yakovleva
affirms that Bukharin too spoke about the arrest of Lenin.
"BUKHARIN: She is mixing it up with another question.
She asserts that the conversation took place before the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace.
"Question: I ask you, were there before the conclusion
of the Brest-Litovsk Peace negotiations with the SocialistRevolutionaries about the arrest of Lenin?
"BUKHARIN: Yes."
And so, at first it was the Socialist-Revolutionaries who said
this, and then Bukharin testifies that there was such a conversation, and that it was he who conducted it.
"Quesion: And were there also negotiations alter the
conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace?
"BUKHARIN: There were.
"Question: What about?
"BUKHARIN: About political contact.
"Question: And about arrest?
"BUKHARIN: And about the arrest.
"Question: Of whom exactly?
"BUKHARIN: Of Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov.
"Question: Also for twenty-four hours?
"BUKHARIN: This formula was not employed then."
As you see., before it was for twenty-four hours, but now it
653

is not for twenty-four hours. Then only Lenin was mentioned,
but now it turns out that Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov are mentioned.
"Question: And how were they to be arrested? And
what for?
"BUKHARIN: In order to form a· new government.
"Question: And what was to be done with the arrested?"
Bukharin hastened to say: "There was no talk of physical
extermination.'' But I had not· asked him that yet.
"Question: When a government is overthrown and
arrested, are not forcible methods resorted to?
"BUKHARIN: Yes.
"Question: Did you envisage adopting forcible methods
when making the arrest? Is this true or not?
"BUKHARIN: It is.
"Question: But what do forcible methods involve? Did
you determine that precisely?
"BUKHARIN: No, we did not.
"Question: And so you decided to act as circumstances
permitted and dictated?
"BUKHARIN: just so.
"Question: But circumstances might dictate very decisive
action?
"BUKHARIN: Yes."
The conclusion is a simple one: it was proposed to overthrow
the government, for this purpose to arrest the government-Lenin,
Stalin and Sverdlov-and to adopt all measures that might be
dictated by circumstances and by the conditions of the struggle that
was being waged for tne purpQse of overthrowing the government.
The struggle was of a most acute kind, and while there was no
talk of assassination-if we assume that what Bukharjn says is
true-why, the very fact, the very aim of overthrowing the government, the very necessity of arresting the leaders of the government which the conspirators had made it their aim to overthrow, quite naturally shows that they could not have repudiated
and renounced the assassination of the leaders, the proposed assassination.
The whole logic of events, the whole meaning of this struggle,
the whole ferocity of the atmosphere in which this .struggle was
waged, the whole acuteness of the question itself-whether there
should be a Brest-Litovsk Peace, that is, whether there should
be a Soviet country, a country buildi]lg a Socialist society, or
whether there should not be.a·Brest-Litovsk Peace, whether there
should not be a Soviet land 7 which they,. considering it a "formality," proposed to surrender to the tender mercies of the enemyall this indicates in the most serious manner that it was a question
of a real struggle, which in all such cases is associated with the
654

inevitability of measures which lead to death, to assassination.
That is why I say that to me, not from the standpoint of criminology-for today, twenty years after this crime, we are not bringing any independent charge against Bukharin-this is important
because it enables us to form a judgment of the connection
which exists between the conspiratorial activities of the assas ..
sin and counter-revolutionary Bukharin and his accomplices, and
what they have been doing subsequently. All this is of importance in showing that on a question of historical interest and significance, Bukharin even to this day is unable and unwilling to
confess all the crimes which he in reality committed against
the Soviet country, against the Soviet power and against the
Soviet people.
Bukharin wrote on this subject in 1924:
"! consider it my Party duty to tell about the proposal
made by the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries at a moment of
bitter factional struggle so as to paralyse that idyllic varnishing of the events of the Brest period which has been practised
by the comrades of the opposition.... "
He is referring to the arrest of Lenin and the overthrow of
the Soviet power. Thus, in 1924 Bukharin admitted that it was a
moment of bitter struggle.
And further:
"They depicted the Brest period in the Party as 'the height
of democracy.' I know very well that this was a period when
the Party was within a hair's breadth of a split, and when
the whole country was within a hair's breadth of its doom."
At such a time, a time of bitter struggle, could people who
were prepared to arrest Lenin, to arrest Stalin and Sverdlov, the
leaders of our Party and of our government, could such people have
stopped short at the prospect of annihilating their opponents,
of murdering our leaders? That is absolutely incongruous, it is
absolutely inconceivable. This is the policy of not telling the
whole truth, an attempt, it seems to me, which has been completely exposed here by the evidence of witnesses and by the very
logic of the historical events that were unfolding at that time.
The monstrous crime that was committed oµ August 30, 1918,
has now also been completely revealed. I am referring to the attempt
made on the life of Vladimir Ilyich Lenin on August 30, 1918, by
the Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist Kaplan. The evidence of
Karelin and Ossinsky enables us to judge how this attempt was
in reality organized. Karelin declared here that for twenty years
every effort was made to keep this terrible crime secret, not to
reveal its real and genuine meaning and significance. Karelin has
affirmed here that the question of a terrorist attempt on the life
of Lenin was raised i,n 1918 by no other than Bukharin himself.
655

Karelin has affirmed that Proshyan reported on the subject to
members of the Central Committee nf the Party of •·Left" SocialistRevolutionaries. Kare!in has affirmed that "a demand of this
kind from the 'Left Communists' made by Bukharin, their ringleader, played an important part in expediting the terrorist act
committed against Lenin by the Central Committee of the Right
Socialist-Revolutionaries." This monstrous crime is a fact.
Ossinsky, on the authority of Stukov, has testified that the
latter was of the same opinion and had the same idea of the crime
of August 30, 1918.
"At the end of 1918," Ossinsky has testified here, "Stukov, who together with Bukharin was connected with the
Socialist-Revolutionaries, told me that the shot fired at
Lenin by the Right Socialist-Revolutionary Fanny Kaplan
was the result not only of the instructions of the leadership
of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, but also of measures that
had been outlined by the bloc of 'Left Communists' with
the Socialist-Revolutionaries aiming at the physical extermination of Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov." (Vol. XLIV, p. 89.)
This evidence is a sufficiently convincing testimony of the
vile, treacherous and diabolical work performed by Bukharin,
that chartered hypocrite and jesuit.
To conclude my appraisal of the conduct of Bukharin and
of Bukharin himself, it must be said that the hypocrisy and perfidy
of this man exceed the most perfidious and monstrous crimes
known to the history of mankind.
He has completely exposed himself in this Court.
We have followed the political life of Bukharin step by step,
year by year.
How many times has Bukharin sworn by the name of Lenin,
only the better to deceive and betray the Party, the country and
the cause of Socialism right afterwards!
How many times has Bukharin kissed the great teacher with
the kiss of Judas the traitor!
Bukharin reminds us of Vasily Shuisky and Judas Iscariot,
who betrayed with a kiss.
'
And the manners of Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin are just like
the manners of Vasily lvanovich Shuisky, as depicted by the famous
writer Ostrovsky:
"Vasily, love, Ivankb,
Whatever he does is bolyl
When clearly preparing for knavery,
Or patently planning some roguery,
See how be sighs and piously smirks,
And says 'Tis a satred cause, brethren!' ... ''
And so with Bukharin-he organizes wrecking and divers,ive

656

acts, espionage and murder, but his look is meek and mild, almost
saintly, and it is as though you hear from the mouth of Nikolai
Ivanovich the meek voice of Vasily Ivanovich Shuisky, "'Tis a
sacred cause, brethren!''
Here is _the. acme of monstrous hypocrisy, perfidy, jesuitry and
inhuman villainy.
The trial has exposed and proved absolutely definitely the
fact that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" represented a
veritable agency of the intelligence services of certain foreign states.
which through this bloc, through this conspiratorial group, were
effecting espionage, wrecking and diversive acts, terrorism, the
undermining of the milita,ry power of the U.S.S.R., that this
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" attemped to provoke armed
attack of these states on the U.S.S.R., with the aim of overthrowing the Socialist system existing in the U.S.S. R., restoring
capitalism and the power of the bourgeoisie in the U.S.S.R., dismembering the U.S.S.R. and severing from it the Ukraine, Byelorussia, the Central Asiatic Republics, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan
and the Maritime Region for the benefit of the states mentioned.
It has been established at this trial that the real masters of
this bloc were Trotsky and the foreign intelligence services, that
all its criminal activities were carried on under the immediate
direction and in accordance with plans drawn up by the General
Staffs of japan, Germany and Poland.
Take the testimony of Chernov. Chernov forms connections
with the police, or, through a police official in Berlin, with Oberhaus. Oberhaus, Chernov says, told him that the German intelligence service was taking proper measures for the overthrow of the
Soviet power. And he further said to Cheroov: "Well, you regard
yourself as the opposition in the Soviet Union, you should unite
to form an organizing force. If you want to seize power, you 1llUSt
not be squeamish about methods of struggle." Speaking of methods
-0f struggle, Oberhaus proposed that closer connections be formed
between the Rights and the German intelligence service. He
said that the whole organization of the Rights could be made
to serve the ends of the German intelligence service.
When asked here in Co.lrt who his masters were, Chernov replied: ''None except Rykov and the German intelligence service.,, Is
it not clear that the organizatfon of this so--called "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites'' was nothing but an espionage agency of the
i.ntelligence services of certain foreign states?
. The accused Sharangovich has fully confirmed here his connection with the Polish General Staff. He confirmed that, as the
head of the local Byelorussian bourgeois-nationalist underground
-0rganization, he .set himself the task of serving the interests of the
Polish intelligence service and the Polish General Staff. He said that
42

657

be had received a proposal on behalf of a certain consul that he
should establish close connections with a number of persons belonging to the leadership of the national-fascist organization in Byelorussia, including Benek. He said that he was told to transmit various
kinds of information required by the Polish intelligence service;
he was instructed to form such close connections with the Polish
General Staff that the latter, in its work against the Soviet state,
might be able to rely upon this contemptible gang of traitors of
the Byelorussian national-fascist organization.
What were the chief aims of this organization? Sharangovich
has himself formulated them briefly: the overthrow of the Soviet
power, the restoration of capitali1111, and the severance of
Byelorussia from the Soviet Union in the event of a war with
fascist states. He said that the necessity was stressed of establishing
close connections with the Polish General Staff for the achievement
ef this goal. This was one of the chief aims pursued by the bourgeois-nationalist organization in Byelorussia in accordance with
the instructions of the centre of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites. '' Wto needed this?This was needed by the Polish intelligence
service, this was needed by the Polish General Staff, which reckoned
that in case of need its success would be" ensured by this small
but dangerous Fifth Column being at its disposal on the territory
of the U.S.S.R.
·
That is why Rykov was quite right when he said here that the
Byelorussian organization of the Rights was virtually an espionage
agency of the Polish General Staff. Rykov told us that he was
aware that Karakban had conducted negotiations with the German
fascists as early as 1933; that the German fascists, as the accused
Rykov expressed it here, were quite favourable to the prospect
<>-f the accession to power of the Rights, and promised to
welcome and support their accession to power in every way.
The favourable attitude of the German intelligence service
was of course dictated exclusively by its own interests: the Rights
and their organization, after all, were a fascist agency. Having
a group of traitors at their disposal, and relying on them, German
fascism could at a lesser cost accomplish its villainous plan
ef military intervention in the U.S.S.R. And what were the
aims? The aims were not only those.which Sharangovich men¥o~ed. Rykov ~ery clearly indicated anotheT .highly character?Sbe feature wh1ch thoroughly exposes the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" as an agency of certain foreign intelligence services.
Questioned on the subject of the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R.,
the severance of a number of republics from the U.S.S.R., and
asked, •'Was there also the aim of preparing a base for
the. fascists, for their attack upon- the U.S.S.R. and for their
victciy?"....,...Rykov' replied: "Yes, that is unquestionably so. n
658

It is quite obvious that the aim of preparing a base for an
attack upon the U.S.S.R. and of ensuring victory over the U.S.S.R.
in the event of such an attack was set by the German, Polish and
other intelligence services to the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites ..
as to a direct agency of the fascist intelligence services. It shows
that Chernov was right when he said that, apart from Trotsky,
the real masters of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" were
indeed the intelligence services of certain foreign states.
Lastly, we recall the testimony of Krestinsky. Like a mouse
in a trap, he during the trial scurried hither and thither, trying
to find a possible way of escape, but in vain. Krestinsky admitted
that as far back as 1920-21, on instructions from Trotsky, he,
Krestinsky, together with other Trotskyites, conducted negotiations
with General Seeckt and with the German Reichswehr, and that
for 250,000 gold marks per annum he sold espionage information
to the German General Staff and ensured the unhampered admission
of German military spies into the U.S.S.R.
What then was the intention, if not to transform the U.S.S.R.
into a colony of German fascism? The essence of this agreement
with the Reichswehr, the threads of which led to the treason and
treachery of the so-called "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, H was
exposed by Krestinsky himself. Permit me to recall it briefly./
"We were receiving," he said, "a small sum of money
and they were receiving espionage information which they
would need during an armed attack. But the German government, '' Krestinsky goes on to say edifyingly, thus revealing
his own cards, "Hitler particularly, wanted colonies, territory,
and not only espionage information. And he" (that is, Hitler)
''was prepared to be satisfied with Soviet territory instea<J
of the colonies for which he would have to fight Englan~
America and France."
Here you have the nakedly cynical attitude, reaching the
very limit of human vileness, ·which quite definitely shows
how certain intelligence services, including the German, and
certain of -the most reactionary, principally military, circles of
certain foreign states regarded the activities of this so-called
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites. "They looked upon them as their
slaves and captives. They regarded them as masters regard their
servants. They sought the aid of these traitors because these traitors
held the keys, at least in their own imagination and partly by
taking advantage of their official positions, to the gates of our
frontiers. They were fitted for the purpose of opening the gates
to the enemy. Although twisting and squirming and trying to
cover up his tracks, the accused Bukharin cynically admitted
this in the end. In a conversation with Rykov and Tomsky, Bukharin said that the front must be opened to the Germans. The
42*

659

question is as clear as clear can be. Marked though they are,
the cards have been comptetely uncovered. They said: "We will
not only supply you with secret information, but at the right
moment we will open the front. In return, pay us money, with
which we will conduct our criminal, underground Trotskyite activities. Why should you fight England, America and France for
colonies? You can transform the U.S.S. R. into your colony-at least
its flourishing border republics, such as the Ukraine. Why should
you fight America, England and France for colonies, when we,
your obedient servants, are prepared to sell Soviet land to you
for those gold marks by which you would help us to carry on our
underground work?''
That is the meaning of this agreement.
Does the existence of such an agreement indicate that the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was a political group of any
kind? No. The "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" is not only a
gang of wreckers, diversionists, assassins and spies, without any
ideology or principles; it is a mere gang of agents of foreign intelligence services in the real meaning of the word. They open the gates
to the enemy, fire on the streets from secret loopholes, assist the
enemy who has invaded town and village, and help to bring about
the defeat of their country.
Krestinsky said: "We were prepared to restore capitalist relations in the U.S.S. R. and to make territorial concessions to the bourgeois states with which we had already come to an agreement.,,
And this, actually speaking, is the whole meaning of the criminal
activities of the bloc.
Grinko does not fall short of Krestinsky in the cynicism of his
testimony. Grinko bluntly stated that the task set them by their
masters, the foreign intelligence services, was chiefly to aid the
foreign aggressors. This, Grinko said here, was the common position
of the Trotskyites, the Rights, the bourgeois-nationalist organizations, and, in particular, the Ukrainian national-fascist organization.
·
This nlea.nt undermining the power of defence of the Soviet
Union, sabotage in the army and in the defence industry,
opening the front in case of war and provoking this war.
An honourable task, say what you like!
. The very enumeration of these criminal aims thoroughly exposes
tlus bloc as a sheer gang of spying and intelligence organizations
4lf certain foreign states.
. lkramov has told us here how the ringleaders of the "bloc of
R.ighis and Trotskyites," and in the first place Bukharin, persuaded him to do everything he couid to become a real agent of
foreign intelligence services.
660

The Moscow ringleaders of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites''
informed Ikramov of the Japanese-German "orientation/' as they
caIIed it, of their connections with the Germans and Japanese.
For what purpose? For the very purpose that was so clearly depicted
by both Grinko and Krestinsky.
The second meeting was devoted to a discussion of wrecking
activities. The third meeting was devoted to the question of connections with England. The accused Khodjayev spoke about this
here very circumstantially and fully.
What did Bukharin tell him? He told him that they must
orientate themselves on England, that if war did not break out
at once, if intervention did not take place soon, it was all up with
them. Bukharin said to Ikramov: "They will bag us all, yet we
cannot expedite war because of England, which in certain respects
is an international arbiter.''
This idea of the conspirators, who placed all their hopes in
an armed attack on the U.S.S.R., that England was a sort of
international arbiter is interesting. It is well known, Bukharin
said, that the British have long had their eyes on Turkestan as
a choice morsel. If such offers are made, the British perhaps
will sooner come over to the side of an aggressor against the
Soviet Union.
Actually speaking, Bukharin did not deny this conversation
here. He spoke about certain details, argued over certain words,
said that it had been formulated differently, but in the main
Bukharin confirmed that there had been such talk, that there was
an "orientation on the British.arbiter,'' who was prepared to receive
a "choice morsel" in the shape of Turkestan. This was also
confirmed by another of the accused, Khodjayev, who admitted
that Bukharin had talked to him, organizing activities in Central
Asia which may be fully and completely described as high treason,
as .working for the defeat and dismemberment of the U.S.S.R.
They regarded the severance of whole re.gions, and even of Union
Republics, from the U.S.S.R. as a recompense for the h€Ip which
a military aggressor was prepared to give the bloc in its criminal
fight for the seizure of power and for the overthrow of the lawful
Soviet government in our great country.
I have already said that all the circumstances that were so
exhaustively revealed at this trial go to show that the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites'' was nothing but an agency of foreign
intelligence services. This circumstance also determined the whole
character and nature of the mutual relations that arose and existed
between this so-called "bloc," on the one hand, and certain foreign
intelligence services, who were the real bosses of these criminals,
vn the other.
661

The character of the relations that existed between the foreign
intelligence seivices and the bloc can be judged by a number of
facts which have been incontrovertibly established in the present
trial.
I would remind you of the interrogation of the accused Rykov.
Asked about the nature of the bourgeois-fascist organization that
was active in Byelorussia under the direction of Goloded, Chervyakov and Sharangovich, Rykov was obliged to admit that even
the appointments to leading posts of any importance in Byelorussia
received the preliminary sanction of the Polish intelligence service.
This fact, in itself, sufficiently vividly illustrates the true
nature of the relations that existed between the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" and the Polish intelligence service. If the Polish intelligence service decided who was to be appointed to the most important posts, it is obvious that the real and true master of the fate
of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and of all its criminal
activities was the Polish intelligence service. This "bloc'' had also
other masters-the intelligence services of other states, with which
individual members of this criminal conspiratorial organization
maintained criminal connections and relations on the instructions
and with the knowledge and consent of the leaders of this
"bloc."
I would remind you of the testimony of the accused Ivanov,
who has already told us here that sometimes the members of the
bloc could not distinguish between the activities of the Rights
and those of the foreign intelligence service, so closely were they
intertwined. I would also remind you that, according to Ivanov,
Bukharin advised him to form connections with the British Intelligern:e Service. Bukharin said that England had very great interests in the Northern Territory. He said that the Right centre
had an agreement with that country about helping the Rights
to overthrow the Soviet power, and that this agreement included
a guarantee of the interests of British timber firms in the forests
of the Northern Territory.
Here too we find clearly expressed the specifically business
concern of the intelligence service with which Bukharin recommended the accused Ivanov to form connections, and with which
the accused Ivanov did form connections in fulfillment of Bukharin's behest. Ivanov stated that Bukharin recommended him
to arrange matters in such a way as to prove to the British bourgeoisie that the Rights were willing to satisfy all the economic
and financial interests of the British bourgeoisie, and recommended
him to give advances to the British bourgeoisie in order, on the
pne band, not to lose their support and, on the other, not to forfeit
theU confidence.
It is perfectly clear that this "confidence'' was based on one
662

thing 'only, namely, the ability of these plotters to pay in cash
-in Soviet land and Soviet blood for their treasonable activities, for the assistance which the foreign aggressors were prepared
to grant the plotters in the achievement of their criminal aims.
It was essentially of this that Rakovsky spoke when he testified
how often the "honest" agents of the foreign intelligence services,
like this nice 'old gentleman sitting here before you in the dock,
found themselves in a :contradictory situation. The position of
those spies who simultaneouslyserved several intelligence services.,
.and there are such among the accused, was very, very difficult.
Rakovsky himself was an expert of thi.s kind, who at one and the
same time served both the Japanese and the British intelligence
services and, with Yurenev, landed in a "difficult" situation.
"We," said Rakovsky here, quoting Yurenev's words,
"have gotten into such a mess that sometimes one does not
know how to behave. One is afraid that by satisfying one
of our partners we may offend another. For instance, here
at present, antagonism is arising between Great Britain
and japan in connection with the Chinese question, while
we have to maintain connections botlt with the British and
Japanese intelligence services.... ''
A hard situation for a spyl A hard situation for a British and
Japanese spy!
" ... We Trotskyites," said Rakovsky, "have to play
three cards at the present moment: the German, Japanese
and British."
We see that this game can end in no good for the gamblers.
" ... It was not quite clear to me, at that time at least,
what the German card promised."
Although it was sufficiently marked.
". . . Personally I thought that . . . japan . • • was
a potent aggressor against the U.S.S.R."
And he goes on to say:
"For us Trotskyites the Japanese card was extremely
important, but, on the other hand, we should not overrate
the importance of Japan as our ally against the Soviet government. Even if Japanese aggression could force its way
into the territory of the U.S.S.R., it would be lost in the
vast spaces, .and in the taiga. As for Great Britain, the
situation was rather more serious. At that moment Great
Britain was antagonistic to Japan. • . • It should not be
forgotten that England once headed a coalition against the
French Revolution and fought on for twenty-five years."
It turns out that the most valuable carp. was that of the British
Intelligence Service. But it is not my purpose to examine the value
and distinguishing features of all these "cards." I only wanted to
663

show how hard was the lot of those gentlemen who managed to
worship.three gods at once, to serve three intelligence services at
one and the same time. We cannot but humanly sympathize with
them, but we can help them in only one way-by depriving them
of the opportunity of playing any cards at all, however valuable
these cards might seem to them.
On the subject of connections with the British aggressors, the
accused Rakovsky testified that the bloc worked for the defeat of
the U.S.S. R. and systematically engaged in spying.
Reference must be made in this connection to Bukharin, who.
wanted to prove here that, actually speaking, he did not favour
the defeat of the U.S.S.R., that he did not favour espionage, nor
wrecking, nor diversive activities, because in general he was not
supposed to have any connection with these practical matters, for
he was a "theoretician," a man who occupied himself with the
problematics of universal questions. But even Bukharin was obliged
to dot all his "i's." He said:
4
'In short, as one of the leaders of the Right centre, it was
my duty to communicate our line to one of the leaders of the
periphery centre."
What was this line?
"Briefly, this line was that in the fight against the Soviet power it is permissible to utilize a war situation and
to make certain concessions to capitalist states for the
purpose of neutralizing them, and sometimes for the purpose
of obtaining their assistance. ''
If this involved and intricate statement of Bukharin's is deciphered, it means downright treason, desertion to the enemy, depending upon military circumstances and war conditions, in
order to utilize assistance of these enemies for the achievement
of one's criminal ends.
When Bukharin was asked: "In other words, orientation towards assistance from certain foreign states?"-he replied: 4'Yes.
it can be put that way.'' He does not want to give a direct answer.
but says: "Yes, it can be put that way."
It can and should be put that way, because it corresponds to the
facts. When asked: "In other words, orientation towards the defeat
of the U.S.S.R.''-Bukharin remained true to his nebulous verbal
acrobatics, and said: "In general, summarized, I repeat, yes."
And so, "summarized,'' Bukharin admits the orientation on
the defeat of the U.S.S.R.; and in the specific conditions in which
be, as a leader of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," found himself, this ''summarized" meant: "We were working for the defeat of
the U.S.S.R.; we were prepared fo open the gates to the enemies.''
uTo open the front to the enemies"-this is what Rykov confirmed7 and what Bukharin could not escape confirming.

664

Comrades judges, I would like in this connection to draw your
attention to the manner in which here, too, Bukharin tried to get
off unscathed, and, while admitting his connections with the military conspiratorial organization of Tukhachevsky and Yakir, he
tried to make play of the phrase "was to" open the front, and the
manner in which he tried to evade a direct answer to this question
which was highly unpleasant to him.
But however Bukharin exerted himself in juggling with words
and phrases, however much he tried to assure us that the concept
"was to," although expressed by one term, has various meanings-we have a clear idea of Bukharin's real attitude to this
question.
It was not a trifling matter that Bukharin, Rykov and Tomsky
were organizing, but a very serious one, the overthrow of the Soviet government and the Soviet power, without shrinking from
any means whatever. Having lost all support within the U.S.S.R.,
and placing all their hopes on foreign states hostile to the U.S.S.R.,
they arranged with them about openingthefront, about their joint
intention of smashing the Soviet people, the Soviet state, in order
by treasonable means to clamber into power, which they would
at once hand over entirely, unreservedly and completely to the
fascists, to their real masters.
Enough of word play! Enough of acrobatics and "philosophy"t
It was high treason that was involved, desertion to the enemy,
opening the front, bringing about the defeat of the U.S.S.R., and
the rout of our fatherland.
The whole espionage work of individual participants in this
plot on all sectors was directed by Bukharin and Rykov. All secret
information was transmitted to the appropriate organs by channels,.
through means and contacts, which were under the control of
Rykov, Bukharin, Yagoda and their accomplices.
Here in Court the connections of Rykov, Bukharin and Yagoda
with the intelligence services of a number of foreign states were
fully revealed. In conjunction with the Mensheviks, with Dan,
with the Second International, with the Socialist-Revolutionaries, with Maslov, with foreign intelligence services abroad, and
together with aggressors, they tried to overthrow the Soviet power
and to restore the rule of real capitalism, inveterate, one hundredper cent capitalism, and the real domination of the landlords
and manufacturers.
All these acts of wrecking, treason and betrayals were combined
with the systematic supplying of foreign intelligence services with
secret information and various kinds of material. Krestinsky, Rosengoltz, Ivanov, Sharangovich, Chernov, Rakovsky, Yagoda and others
systematically transmitted Soviet state secrets to foreign intelligence
services.
665

We have authentic information that the plotters of the "bloc
Rights and Trotskyites" regularly performed services for foreign intelligence services. I shall quote an excerpt from the Tokyo
newspaper "Miyako" of February 20, 1937, which reports a secret
meeting of what is known as the Planning and Budget Commission. Deputy Yoshida asked General Sugiyama, Minister of War,
whether he and the army had any information about the carrying
capacity of the Siberian Railway. The Minister answered this question in the affirmative and said that the carrying capacity of the
Siberian Railway was known to them, that they were in receipt of
systematic information about the capacity of the Siberian Railway
from elements in Russia who were in opposition to the present
Soviet government. japan received information about the Siberian Railway through them.
Here you have these elements, here you have these scouts, spies,
servitors of imperialism, who trade in the interests of our country.
Here you have them-these agents of the Minister of War who is
mustering his forces on the borders of our country for an attack
upon our sacred frontiers.
I cannot refrain from citing another fact. The "japan Times,"
organ of the Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, stated in an editorial article in January 1937:
"That both countries, japan and Germany, naturally
seek to obtain all information in regard to Soviet Russia
that might be of military value, must be accepted as a fact.
If they did not do this they would be both foolhardy and
failing to perform their duty to the State and the people.
The possibility of an armed clash with Soviet Russia at
some future date cannot safely be precluded, although it
is to be hoped that it never comes, and it is the obligation
of those nations which face such a prospect to prepare
in every way possible for gaining the victory."
Gentlemen the accused, do you want proofs of your criminal,
provocative, prying and spying activities, apart from your testimony? Then look for them in the pages of the organ of the
Japanese Ministry of Foreign Affairs, look for them in the pages
<>f the Tokyo newspaper.
Far from concealing their aspirations in the matter of espion.age, when, as in the present case, it concerns the U.S.S.R., the
J~panese _aggressors eulogize espionage as a supreme patriotic
virtue. It 1s clear that we must treat the "virtuous u people now sitting in the dock in the way the quality and profundity of their
4>py £'virtuen merits.
Bukharin, Tomsky, Rykov and Yagoda were preparing to open
the front. But here, as everywhere, as in all their treacherous work,
they acted like provocateurs. And this is not fortuitous, for it is
666
(Jf

characteristic of the method by which these gentlemen work. They
were preparing to open the front, but they wanted to make the
workers and peasants of our country, our whole people, believe
that it was not they who opened the front, but somebody else~
and that, quite the contrary, they were against opening the front,
against treason. They even agreed among themselves to bring to
trial those who opened the front at their own orders, in order, as
Bukharin cynically expressed it, to play on patriotic slogans.
I have no doubt that Bukharin will take advantage of his speech
in defence or of his last plea in order, with the help of the most
.preposterous circus acrobatics, to try once more to attach a special
meaning to this, other than the meaning I, the State Prosecutor,
.attribute to it at this trial. But it seems to me that no other
meaning can be attributed to it.
At one of the sessions of the Court I quoted the testimony of
Bukharin in which he speaks of the high wave of Soviet patriotism
which would never allow anybody to gamble with his country,
:and which for every act of treachery would demand the head, the
life of the traitors.
Bukharin and his pals fully realized and appreciated the signi1icance of this supreme and genuine patriotism of the people, the
high level of patriotism which is shared by the whole country,
where every man, old and young, is prepared in the hour of need to
fay down his life in defence of his motherland against the intrusion
<>f foreign invaders. They realized this, they knew and understood
that it would be dangerous to trifle with the love cherished by the
people for their native land. And realizing this, they built up this
whole system of provocation and treachery. They were prepared to
<>pen wide the gates to foreign intervention, but they wanted to
depict it as being the work of others, against whom these jesuits
and pharisees, these Judas Iscariots and Vasily Shuiskys allegedly raised their "patriotic" voices. Bukharin said that they
intended to bring to trial those guilty of opening the front, and
thus play on patriotic slogans.
The game has been exposed. The masks have been torn from the
traitors' faces, once and for all. Not one of the accused dared to
deny that he criminally worked for the defeat and dismemberment
of the U.S.S.R. Some of them spoke of it plainly, coarsely, cynically; others-I am again referring to Bukharin and Rykovjesuitically veiled their confessions. But in the end even they
dared not and could not deny this crime in the open Soviet
Court. The proofs are too damning, the evidence too convincing!
It was established in previous trials, and once again confirmed
in this trial, that Trotsky had come to an agreement with the German and Japanese intelligence services to wage a joint struggle
against the U.S.S.R. and the Soviet power. At this trial, too, we
66'1

have the circumstantial testimony of one of the accused, Bessonov, on this subject. He said that the agreement was concluded on
the basis of the five points he had mentioned in his testimony.
They were, firstly, the mutual sabotage of all official relations>
sabotage of the normalization of relations between the U.S.S.R.
and Germany. What does this mean?
It means a system of provocation in international relations.
And this, of course, was not an empty word, because we know that
the Trotskyites, masked by their duplicity, were able to worm
their way into a number of fairly important posts, where our foreign policy is put into practical effect. The Rakovskys, Krestinskys~
Yurenevs and the others, the Bessonovs and their like, are all people
who acted as the authorized diplomatic representatives of the
U.S.S.R. in foreign relations. This, incidentally, increases the
gravity of their guilt and of their responsibility before the Soviet
state and the Soviet people.
Sent to represent the interests of our state, in reality they combated these interests in every way. These gentlemen utilized their
official positions-and they all, Rakovsky, Grinko and Krestinsky, acted in this way-in order to thwart the cause ·of peace,
in order by every means to provoke conflicts in the interests of
the imperialists.
The second point of the agreement was all-round collaboration
between the Trotskyite organizations in the U.S.S.R. and the
German secret and espionage organizations and their agents. What
for? In order to undermine the military and economic might of
the U.S.S.R. and to hasten the defeat of the U.S.S.R. in war.
The third point was that German fascism was to help the coup
d'etat in the U.S.S.R. with the object of transferring power to the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
The fourth point was that intervention should be accelerated
and peace immediately concluded with the new government after
it had come to power-a natural step in the plan of these gentlemen's treasonable work.
The fifth point was the severance of the Ukraine from the
U.S.S.R. in favour of Germany, the severance of the Madtime
Region in favour of japan, the severance of Byelorussia in favour
of Poland, the dismemberment of our whole Soviet Union by
severing regions and republics from it and placing them at the
disposal of foreign imperialists.
Bukharin was obliged here to admit that the conditions on
which this so-called alliance-it was not an "alliance" at all, it
was actually a master-and-servant agreement-was concluded were
tbe dismemberment of the U.S.S.R. and the severance of the
l:Jt:raine, the Maritime Region and Byelorussia from the U.S.S.R1 asked Bukharin: "In whose favour?" And he answered: "In
668

favour of Germany, in favour of Japan, and partly in favour of
England.'' This is Bukharin's own admission, which be cannot get
away from, and will not get away from.
The Trotskyites and Rights in fact acted in accordance with
this agreement. Grinko has related what the Ukrainian natfonaliascists did in fulfillment of this agreement. Krestinsky confirmed
what they did in fulfillment of this agreement. As Trotsky had instructed them, they planned diversive, espionage and wrecking
activities, the activities of the Hitlerites and Trotskyites within
the U.S.S.R.
A prominent place in the anti-Soviet "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was held by the bourgeois-nationalist groups, which were
formed in certain of the national republics under the direct influence of the agencies of these same foreign intelligence services
and under the direct guidance of the so-called centre of the "bloc
-0f Rights and Trotskyites."
The traitors Grinko, Khodjayev, Sharangovich and Ikrarnov
are hardened and inveterate counter-revoluti011aries of various
hues with counter-revolutionary records of long standing, from
the Borotbists, the "Milli-Istiklal" and "Milli-Ittikliad" to the
~'bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
Rykov assured Khodjayev that, under the guidance of the
Rights, the Uzbek nationalist organization could secure the "in<l.ependence" of the Uzbek Republic.
Khodjayev was obliged to admit-you have s·een Khodjayev
.andyou know that he is a fairly educated man, who perfectly understands .all the subtleties and variations of the struggle in which he
took part-Khodj'!Yev was obliged to admit that he fully realized
the falsity and hypocrisy of this slogan of the so-called independence
for the Uzbek Republic; he understood perfectly well that this slogan really served to mask the dependence of the Uzbek nation on
the exploiters of the capitalist country which would help the republic to achieve this phantom of independence.
Bukharin worked in the same direction as Rykov. According
to Khodjayev, Bukharin eulogized German fascism and stated
that fascist Germany was now working with all its might to make
-Oermany the hegemon of Europe, and that an agreement between
japan and Germany to fight the U.S.S.R. was likely.
Bukharin persuaded Khodjayev to find ways of getting into
.contact with the British Intelligence Service through the kurbashis, to whom Khodjayev referred here. Bukharin advised him
to get in touch .with British circles and to promise something to
England. He said: "Uzbekistan with its 5,000,000 population cannot become an independent state between two colossuses-the Soviet
Union on the one side and Ore.at Britain on the other. We must

669

make fast on some shore." And Bukharin prompted Khodjayev,
who, incidentally, was quite prepared for it as it was, to make
for the shore of bourgeois counter-revolution.
·
Bukharin spoke about the stabilization of capitalism, and said
that fascism, especially German fascism, had played an important
part in. this. Like a true watchdog of fascism, he barked joyfully
expressing his admiration for German fascism.
Bukharin worked upon Ikramov, too, for the same purpose,
although Ikramov is also a type that does not require to be spoonfed. Bukharin told lies about Lenin; he said that colonial countries
cannot arrive at Socialism with the support of the proletariat of
the U.S.S.R. and avoiding the stage of capitalism, and so on. To
drive it home to Ikramov, Bukharin preached the theory and practice of the restoration of capitalism not only in Uzbekistan, but
throughout the U.S.S.R. He said: "Your methods are petty. You
want to wait until the U.S.S.R. is in difficulties, and then act.
No, you must act in a better way. We approve·your actions in the
matter of the severance of Uzbekistan. On this subject the Rights
have an understanding with the Ukrainian nationalists, the Byelorussian nationalists and the nationalists of .other republics."
The Right-Trotskyite and bourgeois-nationalist traitors wanted"
in the interests of their capitalist masters, once more to place
the capitalist yoke on the nations of our fraternal Union Republics,.
which had been formerly oppressed by tsardom and the landlords
and capitalists, and which had been liberated by the Great
Socialist Revolution. Not daring to speak openly of their treacherous plans for the enslavement of the nations which had made tremendous progress as the result of the national policy of Lenin and
Stalin, which had progressed culturally, politically and economically, these traitors uttered their treasonable, lying and fraudulent
slogans and speeches about the independence of these republics_
As though there is any country in the world except the U.S.S.R.
in which genuine national independence, genuine and complete
national culture, and the genuine prospering of the millions are really
guaranteed! There is no such country in the world except the U.S.S. Rt
While in the colonies of capitalist countries-in India, Algeria, Tunis, Morocco, in the Oriental countries-the nations are languishing beneath the dire yoke of capitalist oppression, where poverty
and want are ·on the increase, where the masses are starving, where
syphilis .and tuberculosis are rampant, and ruin and pauperism becoming ever more widespread, in the U.S.S.R., in its glorious eleven Union Republics, the standard of living of the people
is steadily rising, culture, national in form and Socialist in content, is steadily progressing, and ever more brightly and .joyfully
above the rich and boundless expanses of these republics shine the
great and beneficent rays of the new, Socialist sun, the sun of un670

fading glory of the indestructible fraternal union of the nations
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The provocateurs, spies and fascists strove, of course, to sever
the Union Republics from our Union. Why? Because, as Comrade
Stalin said eighteen years ago, the severance of the border regions
would undermine the revolutionary might of Central Russia,.which
stimulates the movement for emancipation in the West and East.
" . . . The border regions that seceded," Stalin said, ''would inevitably fall into bondage to international imperialism." The
genuine independence of the national republics is ensured only
in the conditions of a Soviet state, in the conditions of victorious
Socialism, and on the basis of the great Stalinist Constitution.
This gang of traitors employed criminal methods which are
already well known and which have frequently been exposed in
Court: methods of wrecking, diversion, espionage and terrorism.
The wreckers, diversionists and spies wormed their way into a
number of branches where they took possession of key positions.
Such was the case with Chernov, who held the important post of
People's Commissar of Agriculture of the U.S.S.R.; such was the
case with Grinko, who held the important post of People's Commissar of Finance of the U.S.S.R.; such was the case with Rosengolt~
who held the important post of People's Commissar of Foreign
Trade of the U.S.S.R.; such was the case with Zelensky, the former Chairman of the Centrosoyuz; and such was the case with a
number of others. These criminals, of course, had opportunities:
for the widest and at the same time the most carefully masked
and most dangerous wrecking activities, such as have rarely been
enjoyed by criminals.
The chief aim of the sabotage and wrecking of this "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites'' was to undermine the economic might
of the U.S.S.R. in every way. To liquidate the Soviet, Socialist
system, to enfeeble the defensive power of the U.S.S.R. and the
defence industry, to shatter agriculture by abolishing the collective
farms and state farms, and to disrupt transport, which is of enormous importance to the economic life of the country-such were
the monstrous aims the criminals set themselves.
They set themselves the ai'm of timing au these fatal consequences for the moment of armed attack by foreign aggressors
upon the U.S.S.R.; and not only to time them for the moment
of attack, but also to strive to have these criminal actions play an
independent role as a definite means of weakening the might of the
Soviet state.
While pursuing their fundamental aim of overthrowing the
Soviet power, the "bloc of Rights and Trots~yites"-as _our
trial has shown-did not shun the most sordid and cymcal
methods to undermine the confidence of the masses in the organs
671

{){ the Soviet powert to sow discontent with the Soviets among
the population, and as far as possible to rouse the people against
the Soviet power.
These provocateur activities, pursued by each of the accused
wherever he was working, represented a tremendous, general political danger. This is particularly borne out by such facts as the
Lepel affair, which was mentioned in this Court-arbitrariness and
lawlessness practised by conspirators and criminals at the instigation of: this bloc and aimed at discrediting the Soviet power in
the eyes of the broad masses of the population by the practice of
unlawful acts.
The trial and the preliminary investigation have shown how
unscrupulously cynical and monstrously criminal were the means
and methods employed by the bloc for the achievement of its
aims. This work of wrecking and sabotage was particularly danger-0us in view of the extremely important positions occupied by a
number of the accused in the Soviet state system.
Take the finances. The chief line of the wreckers in the sphere of
-finances-as formulated by Rykov, in agreement with Bukharinwas "to strike at the Soviet government with the Soviet ruble."
This is a paraphrase of the old Trotskyite slogan, made known to
us in other trials through Pyatakov; namely, "to ·strike with the
most effective means at the most sensitive spots."
"To strike at the Soviet government with the Soviet ruble"such were the directions which determined all the activities of
-Orinko, the former People's Commissar of Finance, who at the
same time acted as an agent of the German and Polish intelligence
services and as Bukharin's and Rykov's right-hand man. It was
these directions, this decision of the "bloc'' that he endeavoured to
carry into effect in all conscience, a rotten conscience though it was.
Moreover, we know that finances are not self-contained, but
determine the direction and development of all branches of industry. And this was taken into account by the criminal bloc
<>f wreckers. Wrecking in the financial sphere spread to various
branches of economy. In agriculture, which is of tremendous importance to the. U.S.S.R.• the wrecking work was designed as far
as possible to frustrate the task set by the Party and the government of achieving a harvest of seven to eight billion poods.
Grinko bas mentioned the wrecking work he performed in the
sphere of taxation and in the savings banks., where he tried in
every way to incense the public. We all know how abominably the savings bank business was organized under Grinko,
Wben depooitors had to waste an enormous amount of time and
~uatered endless unpleasantness and insolence, rudeness and
atienti<m, aOO when every attempt was made to incense the
public aud t~ scare them away from the savings banks.

lack•

672

Grinko has now frankly explained the secret. The secret was
the deliberate attempt to exasperate the depositors and to undermine the savings bank business. This business was put in charge
of such a cut-throat, as Grinko himself called him, as Ozeryansky,
who at the same time was preparing terrorist acts against the
leaders of our Party and government.
I will not deal with other facts that show that in Grinko we
have an old and ingrained enemy of the Soviet power, who had
entirely and completely sold himself to the German intelligence
service, who actively strove by means of wrecking, diversion,
treachery and terrorism against the Soviet power to bring about
the restoration of capitalism.
Take another spy, Chernov, an undoubtedly "talented'' individual, because in one evening he managed to visit Dan and
Kibrik, to get into a scrap with the police, to land in the Polizeipr"asidium and to become a German spy.
However, there is nothing improbable in this. That is how it
happens in life with people like Chernov. He has only now
acquired that more or less fresh and healthy look. Confinement
has done him a lot of good. He had a different look when he was
free, the haggard look of a toper, who drank more than he worked.
He suffered from a social disease-alcoholism. And here he goes
abroad on government business. But at the same time he accepts
a commission from the "bloc," which takes advantage of his
accidental trip abroad to send him to establish connections
with Dan. He gets to Dan and Kibrik. Dan and Kibrik are
German spies, that is clear. It can be seen from the mere fact that
the conversation he had with Dan and Kibrik immediately became known to the intelligence service of the Polizeiprasidium.
It is said that walls have ears. But there are walls that have
eyes, walls through which not only everything can be seen, but
through which even a camera can pierce. And so, while Chernov
drank and ate with Dan and Kibrik, a camera clicked and
perpetuated this "meeting of friends' '-Chernov and Dan. The
Polizeiprasidium got possession of a document which might spoil
Chernov's whole career. He had gone on government business, but
got himself tied up with such inveterate Mensheviks as Dan and
Kibrik and carried on a love intrigue with them. This might cost
Chernov something more than his political career. And the German
intelligence service played on this. It did not consider Chernov
important enough to waste a taxi ride on him-a trolleybus would
do. But the trolleybus is boarded by people who start a scrap, a
row, which ends in the police station. A fine picture this-a
People's Commissar who starts a row and slaps a policeman's
face. Add to this the compromising photos, and Cbernov was
"cooked." Chernov had either honestly to break and make a full

673

right-about face, or swim with the current he had got into. It should
be added that Chernov is a former Menshevik and stuck to his.
Menshevism to the last minute. Consequently, like Rosengoltz,
he could repeat the prayer-"Let his enemies be scattered.'' Even
Rykov poked fun at Chernov, saying that he managed in one
evening to land in the police station and to become a
spy.
But is the recruiting of intelligence service agents done otherwise? We know from the abundant material that has been recently published that they are caught in dance halls, in private conversations, in love affairs, when members of the charming sex are
specially introduced and play the part of far from charming representatives of far from charming institutions. We know that they
are caught by card games and by a bottle of brandy. They are
caught like moths attracted by a candle.
We learnt in the last trial how skilfully the German intelligence service, to give it its due, recruited Stroilov. Rakovsky,
a man of great experience in the world, told us here how he was
recruited by the British and Japanese intelligence services, and
how a certain Armstrong or a certain Leckart turned him into
a British spy.
So this Chernov acts on instructions of the German intelligence service and bluntly tells us that "the German intelligence
service made a special point of the organization of wrecking activities in the sphere of horse-breeding," the purpose being, as
Raivid said, not to provide horses for the Red Army. The matter
is clear. It is not difficult for Chernov to fulfil this commission,.
and he proceeds to fulfil it. This man specially selects three factories: Kashintsevo, Orel and Stavropol. What for? In order, as
he put it here, to prepare "serums with virulent bacteria." He
does this in order to disrupt horse-breeding, to destroy horses, and
to undermine stock-breeding in general.
Who, of course, can do this better than a man who occupies
such a high post as Chernov? Who else could set up factories specially for the preparation of infectious serums? He alone. And
he did it. He has himself told us here that 25,000 horses were
destroyed at his behest. A large number of horses were exterrninat~
ed in regions like Siberia. They deliberately infected pigs with
erysipelas and the plague. They did this in the Voronezh Region,
in the Azov-Black Sea Territory and in the Leningrad Region.
The purpose was plain-to sap the defence efficiency of the Red
Army. This is not mere wrecking, it is espionage wrecking, it is.
the scouts of the war-time enemy, who bad decided to take his.
cue fr~m the Iliad and the Odyssey, and to smuggle a Trojan
horse into the city, so that if need be this horse might serve
as a base of support against the defenders of the fatherland.
674

Rosengoltz also acted in a way that served the interests of the
Germans and Japanese. He specially signed an oil agreement that
furthered· the interests of these foreign states. He specially organized the sale of gold tailings in a wrecking way, to serve the interests
of these same states and in direct violation of the interests of his
own fatherland. He organized in a wrecking and criminal way the
export of iron to japan, so that this iron might be used to make the
shells with which the Japanese military are preparing, if not to
bombard, at least to intimidate our country. He retarded imports
for defence purposes in every way. He acted just as he was told
to by the intelligence service, utilizing his high post, playing a
game of deceit and perfidiously betraying his. duty to the state.
Ikramov and Khodjayev did not lag behind their central "colleagues" in wrecking work. Ikramov himself testified here on
wrecking work in Namangan, in the silk mills, in the cottonginning plants, and in cotton growing. According to their testimony, Rykov and Bukharin played a perfectly definite role irt
the organization of this wrecking and sabotage-a role which
may be described as a leading one.
Take Zelensky. I shall only refer here to the most abominable
practice of mixing glass and nails with foodstuffs, butter in particular,
which hit at the most vital interests, the health and lives of our
population. Glass and nails in butter! This is so monstrous a crime
that, in my opinion, all other crimes of the kind pale before it.
In our country, rich in resources of all kinds, there could not
have been and cannot be a situation in which a shortage of any
product should exist. It was just for this reason that this whole
wrecking organization made it its task to create a shortage of things
which we possess in superabundance, to keep the market and the
-consumption of the population in a strained state. I shall only
recall one episode in the activities of Zelensky, the case of the
fifty carloads of eggs which he deliberately destroyed so as
to create a shortage of this necessary food article in Moscow.
It is now clear why there are interruptions of supplies here and
there, why, with our riches and abundance of products, there is
a shortage first of one thing, then of another. It is these traitors
who are responsible for it. And it enabled them to stir up feeling
against the system of our economic administration, against the
whole system of the Soviet power. Striking at the daily needs of
the population is in fact complying with the old instructions
of Ryabushinsky, who wanted to strangle the proletarian revolution with the gaunt hand of famine. But he did not succeed!
In organizing this wrecking work, all these Rykovs and Bukharins, Yagodas and Grinkos, Rosengoltzes and Chernovs, and so
on and so forth, pursued a definite aim, namely, to try to strangle
675

the Socialist revolution with the gaunt hand of famine. They did
not succeed, and never will succeed!
Sharamwvich artificially ~preads anemia among horses. Some
30,000 horses perish. Sharangovich undermines the peat industry.
Sharangovich deliberately provokes national enmity and fosters
nationalist sentiments among the Byelorussian population.
Ivanov destroys factories, destroys the paper and cellulose industry, although cautiously, anxious not to go too far
in damaging the interests of his English masters, to whom the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" wanted to hand over the timber
industry, and for whom he worked to the best of his ability.
There you have the outrageous and monstrous picture of the
carefully conceived and strictly organized-we must give the
criminals their due-and strictly planned system of wrecking
and diversive measures, designed not only to undermine the military and economic might of our country, but also to provoke discontent and irritation among the broad masses of the population
by measures which were difficult to detect.
To this must be added the organization of direct and open
armed attacks upon the Soviet power, which also has its history.
In conjunction with Rykov, Bukharin sends Slepkov to the North
Caucasus and Yakovenko to Siberia, who provoke there insurrectionary movements, form contacts with Cossack Whiteguard
circles abroad and prepare the way for a Cossack landing party
in the North Caucasus. Rykov and Zubarev organize insurrection,ary bands in .the Urals. Ikramov and Khodjayev, again under
the direction of Bukharin, Rykov and othe.rs, organize insurrectionary bands in Central Asia, consisting of mullahs, bais and
every kind of declassed element. Even Ivanov in the Northern
Territory, on the direct instructions of Bukharin, works to organize insurrectionary bands of deported kulaks. This apparently was
the way Bukharin intended to ensure that the kulaks grew into
Socialism.
I now pass to the next section, namely, the terrorist activities
of the accused and the murders of public figures of the Soviet
state planned and executed by them, the murders of S. M. Kirov,
V. R. Menzhinsky, V. V. Kuibyshev and A. M. Gorky, and the
murder of M. A. Peshkov.
This is one of the most sinister an.d most painful features in
the trial.
How did Rykovexplain the adoption of terrorism by his underground group? Very frankly. He said: "In view of the illegal and
.conspiratorial character of the counter-revolqtionary organization
of }:he Rights, the absence of any kind of mass basis for its counter-revo'4ihonary -activities, and the absence of all hope Qf

676

arnving at power in any other way, the adoption of terrorist
methods, in the opinion of the centre, held out some prospects."
Rykov has given in Court a full and consistent account of the
way the organization of the Rights was secretly formed and the
way it was passing to ever sharper forms and methods of struggle.
Rykov dates the growth of terrorist tendencies back to the period
preceding 1930. Approximately in 1932, according to Rykov's testimony, there definitely formed what he called a positive attitude
towards the use of terrorism as a method of struggle for power.
Rykov here made a certain philosophical digression to stress the
fact that he did not conceive terrorism in theory only, without
practice. And, indeed, having adopted the position of terrorism,
Rykov at once proceeded to organize terrorist acts and to prepare
for such acts. He prepared for the assassination of our leaders with
all the pedantry and with all the calmness with which he gave his
explanations here in Court, and with which, apparently, he at
one time signed his orders in the Commissariat of Post and Telegraph.
The chill and stench of death breathes in the testimony of
Rykov and the other Right and Trotskyite fascist conspirators.
Terrorism is in full swing. The whole bloc systematically
and pedantically devotes itself to terrorism.
Bukharin also favoured terrorism, although, as he says, he
orientated himself rather on mass revolts than on terrorism. Well,
how he orientated himself it is his business to explain; but we
know that a very long time ago-it can now be considered fully
proved-in 1918, he took part in the organization of the terrorist
acts of Kaplan, the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Trotskyites and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries. He himself says
quite openly that later, in 1932, he conducted negotiations with
Semyonov, a former Socialist-Revolutionary, organizer of terrorist
acts and leader of Socialist-Revolutionary action squads; he
negotiated with him for the organization of a terrorist fight against
Comrade Stalin and Comrade Kaganovich. In 1932, through Pyatakov and Sedov, Bukharin conducted negotiations about the conditions, the directions, or, as he called it, the line of Trotsky,
which was that terrorist methods must be adopted. And it is characteristic that Bukharin at once proceeded to the practical execution of this line. It is now clear that Bukharin's position on
this question was anything but theoretical: he acted like a real
practical worker, for it was he who conducted negotiations with
Semyonov and it was he who commissioned Semyonov to organize a
terrorist act. It was he who, although somewhat later, entrusted
the organization of an armed and bloody kulak revolt to his disciple, Slepkov, and others. The conspiratorial bloc widely developed
the organization of terrorist groups, which made the practical

677

preparations for terrorist acts, for the assassination of Kirov.
This assassination was fully revealed and unmasked in the preceding trial, but it has only now been established that the ;;ictivities of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite centre which murdered Sergei
Mironovich Kirov were not of an independent character. It has
now been established that Kirov was assassinated by decision of
this very Right-Trotskyite centre, of this bloc, which may be
called the centre of all centres.
The accused Yagoda confirmed in Court that Kirov was assassinated by direct decision of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, ''
that this decision was carried out by Yagoda, to whom this shameful duty was entrusted. And Yagoda performed this duty. He
gave orders to Zaporozhetz, assistant chief of the Regional Administration of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs in Leningrad, to do all he could to have this assassination committed.
Some two months before the assassination, Leonid Nikolayev
was detained and brought to the Regional Administration.
He was found to be in possession of a revolver and cartridges
and a chart of the route that Kirov used to take. This made it
perfectly clear that this scoundrel was preparing to commit a monstrous crime. But observing the direct orders of Yagoda, Zaporozhetz released this scoundrel, and two months later Nikolayev
assassinated Kirov, committing this dastardly act with the direct
participation of the contemptible traitor Yagoda, whose duty it was
at that time to protect the persons of members of the government.
Yagoda confirmed in Court that Rykov and Bukharin had
taken part in the adoption of this decision; that Rykov and
Yenukidze had participated in the meeting of the centre where
the question of assassinating S. M. Kirov was discussed, and that
therefore Rykov and Yenukidze had taken a direct part in discussing the question of the assassination of Sergei Mironovich
Kirov. In reply to my direct question whether Bukharin and Rykov
were telling the truth here when they declared that they knew
nothing about this assassination, Yagoda stated that this could not
be so, because when Yenukidze told him that the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites" had decided at a joint meeting that a terrorist
act should be committed against Kirov, he, Yagoda, refused to
have anything to do with it for certain "tactical'' and conspiratorial
reasons, but he was, nevertheless, aware that this was a decision of
their centre and not the action of a guerilla band of conspirators,
that this decision emanated from the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," in which Bukharin and Rykov had taken an active part.
It has now been definitely established that Yagoda had an immediate part in the assassination of Comrade Kirov. I also consider it proved that Rykov and Bukharin had an immediate part
in the ~ination.

678

What are my proofs?
If we assume that Rykov and Bukharin had no part in this
.assassination, then it must be admitted that for some reason or
·other two of the principal leaders of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,, that adopted the decision to assassinate Kirov held aloof
irom this dastardly act. Why? Why did people who had organized
·espionage, who had organized insurrectionary movements and
i:errorist acts, and who, on their own admission, had received
instructions from Trotsky on terrorism, suddenly, in 1934,
stand aloof from the assassination of one of the greatest comrades-in-arms of Stalin, one of the most prominent leaders of the
Party and the government?
Bukharin and Rykov did know about itl Such important
leaders of this "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" as Rykov and
Bukharin could not but know about this important terrorist act.
It would have been anomalous if they had not known it, it would
nave been entirely illogical.
Bukharin and Rykov have admitted that the assassination of
leaders of the Party and the government, of members of the Political- Bureau, was part of their plans. It was this, too, that Bukharin talked about with Semyonov, or Semyonov talked about
with Bukharin. Why should we assume that, having entered into
negotiations with Semyonov for the organization of the assassination of members of the Political Bureau, Bukharin deletes from
ihis list of persons who are to be slain one of the most influential members of the Political Bureau who had distinguished
himself by his irreconcilable fight against the Trotskyites, Zino-vievites and Bukharinites? Where is the logic in such behaviour?
There is no logic in it.
Finally, Rykov admitted that in 1934 he instructed Artemenko
io keep a watch on the automobiles of members of the government.
For what purpose? For terrorist purposes. Rykov was organizing
-the assassination of members of our government, of members of
-the Political Bureau. Why should Rykov make an exception in
the case of Sergei Mironovich Kirov, who nevertheless was assas·sinated on the decision of this accursed bloc? He made no such
·exception!
Yenukidze and Yagoda were members of the centre and closest
;associates of Bukharin and Rykov. How can we believe that
Yenukidze and Yagoda-who had a share in the assassination
of Sergei Mironovich Kirov, who were closest associates of Rykov
and Bukharin, and who were the centre of the whole system of terrorist acts against leaders of the Party and the government-how
.can we believe that Rykov and Bukharin did not know what
was known to Yenukidze, the immediate friend, accomplice and
.coadjutor of Bukharin and Rykov, and what was known to
679

Yagoda, the closest friend, accomplice and coadjutor of Bukharin
and Rykov?
These are the circumstances which completely prove the
participation of Rykov and Bukharin in the organization of the
assassination of Sergei Mironovich Kirov.
But, as the Court proceedings have established, the terrorist
activities of the Right and Trotskyite traitors were not confined to
the assassination of Kirov.
As the investigation has established, Alexei Maximovich Gorky,
Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky and Valerian Vladimirovich
Kuibyshev fell victims to the terrorist acts committed on the
instructions of this same "bloc of . Rights and Trotskyites."
M. Peshkov, the son of A. M. Gorky, was also the victim of
assassination. In this connection Yagoda testified as follows:
"I declare categorically that the murder of Kirov was
carried out on the instructions of the centre of the 'bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites.' It was also on the decision of
this centre that terrorist acts were committed against
Kuibyshev, Menzhinsky and Gorky."
This was also confirmed by the persons who took a direct
part in these assassinations. The dastardly design of the chief of the
murderers, Yagoda, was executed in the most perfidious, dastardly
and jesuitical fashion. Yagoda at first tried to deny all share in
the organization of the murder of Maxim Alexeyevich Peshkov.
He then admitted it in camera. He fully confirmed, as the records
of the trial show, the testimony he gave in the preliminary investigation; he confirmed the fact that he had organized the murder of Maxim Peshkov, explaining that his unwillingness to speak
of it was due to the fact that the motives of the murder were of
a strictly personal character.
But Yagoda spoke about the murder of Menzhinsky in open
session, denying, however, that there had been any personal or
careerist motives for it. He explicitly said:
"I deny that in causing the death of Menzhinsky I was
guided by considerations of a personal nature. I aspired to
the post of head of the 0.G.P.U. not out of personal considerations, not for careerist considerations, but in the
interests of our conspiratorial activity."
This is very probable, but the one does not exclude the other.
That Yagoda is capable of murder for personal reasons is shown
by his own confession regarding the murder of Maxim Peshkov.
He explicitly stated that the motives were personal ones. The
possibility is therefore not excluded that Yagoda was guided by
personal motives here too.
He said that there was a special decision of the centre on this
question, which decision was transmitted to him by Yenukidze.
680

It envisaged recourse to doctors, which furnished a perfect
guarantee against exposure.
As we see, Yagoda is not a simple murderer. He is a murderer
with a guarantee against detection. But here too his expectations have not been justified. The guarantee proved to be worthless, it failed. Yagoda and his vile and criminal activities have
been exposed, exposed not by the treacherous intelligence service
which was organized and directed against the interests of the
Soviet state and our revolution by the traitor Yagoda, but by
that genuine and truly Bolshevik intelligence service which
is guided by one of Stalin's most remarkable comrades-in-armsNikolai Ivanovich Yezhov.
Yenukidze and Yagoda discussed what, from the standpoint
of the guarantees that Yagoda sought, would be the best way of
despatching Menzhinsky and the other victims they had selected. Yagoda advances his crafty idea, namely, to cause death,
as he says, by illness, or, as he put it here in Court: "l admit
my guilt in the illness of Maxim Peshkov." This, by the way, is
not as paradoxical as it might at first seem. It is not so paradoxical
to create the conditions under which a weak and undermined organism would fall sick, and then to devise a method of treatment, or, as Pletnev put it, to foist on the weakened constitution
some infection-not to combat the illness, to help not the patient
but the infection, and thus to bring about the death of the patient.
Yagoda has mastered the technique of slaying by the most
crafty means. His was the last word in bandit "science," way
beyond most other criminals, to whom the scope and depth
of Yagoda 's criminal designs would have been incomprehensible.
Yenukidze rejected Yagoda 's proposal to kill Sergei Mironovich Kirov by illness. He said that Kirov was to be assassinated in the way the centre had decided. But, as Yagoda
tells us, he promised that next time they would adopt the method
and means proposed by Yagoda.
This time came when the next murders 'Were discussed.
"When Yenukidze conveyed to me the decision of the
contact centre about the assassination of Kirov," Yagoda
said, "l expressed my apprehension that a direct terrorist
act might expose not only myself, but the whole organization as well. I pointed out to Yenukidze that there was
a less dangerous method, and I reminded him, Yenukidze,
how Men.zhinsky's death was brought about with the help
of physicians. Yenukidze replied that the assassination of
Kirov must be carried out the way it was planned, that the
Trotskyites and Zinovievites took it upon themselves to
commit this murder, and that it was our business not to
place any obstacles.
681

"As for the safe method of causing death with the
help of physicians, Yenukidze said that in the near future
the centre would discuss the question as to who exactly
of the leaders of the Party and the government should be
the first to be done to death by this method."
Could anything surpass the cynicism and perfidy of these people
who with revolting calmness and coolness discussed which of
the leaders of the Party and the government it would be best to
murder, and what method should be adopted in order to avoid
detection?
Yagoda further said:
"Some time later, during my next meeting with Yenukidze, he told me that the centre had decided to undertake
a number of terrorist acts against members of the Political
Bureau and, in addition, against Maxim Gorky personally ....
Yenukidze explained to me that the 'bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites,' considering that the overthrow of the Soviet
government was a prospect of the near future, regarded
Gorky as a dangerous figure. Gorky was a staunch supporter
of Stalin's leadership, and in case the conspiracy was
carried into effect, he would undoubtedly raise his voice
in protest against us, the conspirators."
That is why the question of killing Alexei .Maximovich Gorky
was raised and finally decided by this bloc.
Another decision was to remove Valerian Vladirnirovich Kuibyshev, who was one of the active members of the LeninistStalinist Political Bureau.
Thus, in the course of this brief period three victims, three
remarkable men, met an untimely death by decision of the "bloc
Qf Rights and Trotskyites." Three of the finest people of our
country, true sons of their fatherland, fell victim to a shameless
conspiracy of traitors. And among them was the pride of Russian
and world literature, the great Russian author and literary genius,
Alexei .Maximovich Gorky.
Every line of his songs and stories, of his novels and tales,
breathes the spirit of nobility and the ardour of revolutionary
action. It was not without good reason that he bound up his life
with the great Lenin and the great Stalin, as one of their best
and closest friends. It was not without good reason that Lenin
several times wrote that Gorky was a man of great artistic talent
who had done and would do much for the world proletarian
movement.
It was not without good reason that Lenin wrote that Gorky
was undoubtedly the greatest representative of proletarian art,
who by his great artistic productions had formed firm ties with
the working class of Russia and the world. Gorky sensed the com682

ing storm, he foretold the victory of our movement, the triumph
of the bright intellect of the proletariat over the murk and vileness
of capitalism.
One of the finest friends of toiling mankind perished from
the treacherous blows delivered at the sick heart of this great
man. One of the brightest and mightiest beacons of human reason
and human beauty was extinguished. This beacon was extinguished
by these traitors, by these beasts in human form, who coldly and
treacherously stopped forever the ardent and noble heart of this
great man.
Everything has now been brought to light, We now know not
only how the murders were committed, but the motives for the
murders and the murderers themselves. Bessonov said that when
in Paris in July 1934 he met Trotsky, who always rancorously
hated Gorky, as also Gorky hated Trotsky, the super-bandit of
international espionage and treachery, Trotsky then said that
Gorky must be removed at all costs, that Gorky was widely popular
as a close friend of Stalin's and as a champion of the general line
of the Party. Trotsky gave Bessonov' direct orders to convey to
Pyatakov. As Bessonov tells us, this message was couched in
the most categorical form, namely, to physically destroy Gorky
at all costs. And this order of the enemy of the people and
super-bandit Trotsky was brought by Bessonov to this country,
to the U.S.S.R., and transmitted to Pyatakov, transmitted to
the bloc, which, as Yagoda has testified, and as I shall pro~e
later, accepted this order and adopted the decision to murder
A. M. Gorky. This is so monstrous a crime that I consider it necessary to dwell upon it particularly and specially at greater length.
The first question I should like to raise is whether Rykov
and Bukharin took part in this affair, whether they knew that
preparations were being made for this monstrous villainy. To
this question I answer firmly and unhesitatingly: yes, they did
know; yes, they did take part in it. I do not wish to use any other
evidence, and particularly the evidence of Yagoda. I will use (1)
the testimony of Rykov and Bukharin themselves, and (2) what
I call the logic of things. What is the position? just see what
-Rykov says on this subject. Rykov stated that he had had a talk
with Yenukidze, that is, one of the most active members and
organizers of the conspiratorial bloc. We have the evidence of
Maximov-Dikovsky to show how active Yenukidze was in the
organization of the assassinations. Yenukidze repeatedly summo~ed
him and instructed him how best to cause the d!!ath of Valerian
Vladimirovich Kuibyshev. Yenukidze and Yagoda had charge of
this "job.,, And it is with this Yenukidze that Rykov talked.
What about? Let us take only what Rykov himself said: "Yenukidze told me that the Trotskyites and Zinovievites were extremely
683

concerned because of the influence which Gorky was acquiring and
because he was a determined supporter of Stalin and the general
line of the Party." This is just what Bessonov was told by
Trotsky in 1934, and what he brought here in the autumn of
1934 and transmitted to the bosses, the heads, the ringleaders
of this bloc.
And so there follows from Rykov's testimony the first incontrovertibly established circumstance: in 1935 Rykov and
Yenukidze had a conversation about Gorky; they talked about the
tremendous influence which Alexei Maximovich Gorky wielded over
public opinion as a •true friend and supporter of the general line
of the Party, and as a true friend and supporter of the Stalin leadership. And this is what worries the Trotskyites and Zinovievites,
it worries them just as they were worried when they discussed
the assassination of Sergei Mironovich Kirov. For they selected
Sergei Mironovich Kirov as a victim of their villainy for the same
reasons. And here you have the complete coincidence, the full
historical logic of this conspiracy.
What came next? "They" (the Trotskyites and Zinovievites)
"considered it necessary," said Rykov, "in view of this significance of Gorky's-and his significance both abroad and in our
country required no confirmation-they insisted, as he phrased it,
on putting an end to Gorky's political activity." If Rykov had said
only that, it would have been enough. Even a child could have
understood what this implied. How can the political activity of
a grown man be put an end to in our country? How could Gorky
be compelled to stop being politically active in the direction he
had displayed himself, as a champion of the Bolshevik, LeninistStalinist truth? How could he be compelled to do this?
Men like AI Capone in America organize gangster raids, kidnap
people or their children, and then demand ransom. But this is
impossible in our country, because we make short shrift of Al
Capones. How in our country, in the conditions that exist in
the Soviet state, could it be made impossible for Gorky to display
political activity except by taking his life? And in reply to
my question, Rykov explicitly stated: "He," that is, Yenukidze,
"spoke in such a raised voice, or in such sharply hostile expressions, that it was clear to me that this tone concealed the
possibility of the employment of violent measures." Consequently,
I consider it quite definitely established that in 1935 Yenukidze
and Rykov talked in a tone menacing to the life of Gorky. And it was
quite clear to Rykov that measures of violence against Gorky
were intended. And I again asked the same question: "What were
these violent measures'! Did you count on isolating Gorky, did
you count on keeping him in some sort of confinement? How
could that be done in 1tur country, in the country of the prole-

684

tarian dictatorship?" This could be done in only one way, by
slaying Gorky. Rykov understands that only this could have been
implied, and only in this way are we entitled to interpret this
criminal conversation, which amounted to nothing else than that
Yenukidze was informing Rykov of the preparations for the assassination of Alexei Maximovich Gorky.
And finally, in reply to my last question during the Court
investigation: "What does 'going to the extent of violent measures'
mean? May it also mean murder?"-Rykov explicitly answered:
''Of course. ''
I asked Rykov: "You knew that preparations for Gorky's
murder were being made?" How would Rykov have answered this
question if he had known nothing about the crime? He would
have answered: "I did not know." But what did Rykov say?
Here is the stenographic report. He said: "Not exactly." Not
exactly, but he did know!
I regard as fully proved and established the following facts,
from which only one conclusion follows, namely, that Rykov
took part in the preparations for the murder of A M. Gorky.
Firstly, Yenukidze and Rykov spoke in 1935 about the particular
rancour which the bloc entertained against Alexei Maximovich
Gorky. It is true that they tried to lay this at the door of the
Trotskyite-Zinovievite part of the bloc; but this does not change
the situation in any way. Secondly, they expressed this rancour in tones which implied preparations for violent measures
designed "to put an end to Gorky's political activity." And thirdly, the idea of putting an end to Gorky's political activity
included even the adoption of violent measures against Gorky.
Fourthly, these violent measures included the assassination
of Alexei Maximovich Gorky. Rykov and Bukharin knew about
these violent measures. They knew that preparations were being
made for the assassination of Gorky, they organized this assassination, they shielded this assassination. Rykov and Bukharin were
therefore participants in this vilest assassination of A. M. Gorky.
And Bukharin-that damnable cross of a fox and a swinehow does he behave here on this question? As befits a fox and a
swine. He squirms and wriggles. But in the end Bukharin virtually
says the same as Rykov. Let us take this part of Bukharin's testi.mony. Allow me to refer to the following part of his testimony:
."In 1935 Tomsky told me that Trotsky was preparing some
hostile action or hostile act against Gorky."
How did Tomsky know about this? He of course knew about
it from Bessonov, who had brought these instructions from abroad.
And what were Trotsky's instructions? To destroy Gorky, to destroy
him physically. Bukharin testifies: "Tomsky said that Trotsky
_was preparing a hostile action or a hostile act against Gorky.''
685

I ask, through whom was Trotsky preparing this hostile action? Throuah this bloc, of course, which was in the hands of Trotsky, through the bloc in which were intermingled Rights and
Trotskyites, Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, bourgeois
nationalists and just scoundrels of all shades, degrees and categories.
This fact has been established. Bukharin himself admitted
that in 1935, a year before Gorky's death, Tomsky had informed
Bukharin that Trotsky was preparing a hostile act against Gorky.
This is exactly what Rykov said when he reported his conversation with Yenukidze, and this, in its turn, is what was said by
Bessonov when reporting the conversation he had had with Trotsky in Paris in July 1934. There are no divergences here at all_
Let us examine the second question: What exactly was this
hostile act, what did this hostile act represent? It is not so easy
to get a direct reply to a direct question from Bukharin.
I asked Bukharin: "What did this hostile act consist in?" He
gave no direct answer. He said: "Action against the 'Stalinite
Gorky,' as a defender of Socialist construction in general, and
of Stalin's Party policy in particular." That is what they had
in mind. "This referred to the great resonance that every word
uttered by Alexei Maxirnovich found on the international arena
in general, and among intellectuals in particular."
Here again we have complete coincidence of the facts
of which Rykov spoke, of which Bessonov spoke, of which Yagoda
knew and spoke, and of which Bulanov knew and spoke. Here
everything is organically connected.
I asked: "Did Tornsky link up the perpetration of a hostile act
against Gorky with the question of the overthrow of the Soviet
government?" Bukharin answered that "in essence he did." Consequently, it was not merely a question of causing Gorky some
personal unpleasantness, or as Rykov, in his involved way, said,
"putting an end to his political activity," but of committing
such a hostile act against Gorky as would directly represent
one of the elements in the overthrow of the Soviet power.
Clearly, when put in this way, the intention was not to deprive
Gorky of the possibility of writing articles or giving lectures,.
although even that is beyond your power, gentlemen murderers.
Consequently, we must here recognize what Bukharin confirmed,.
namely, that the hostile act against Gorky was associated with
the aim of overthrowing the Soviet power and was one of the
acts in the struggle against the Soviet power.
We know how the plotters conceived the struggle against
the Soviet power. Their methods were terrorism, treason, etc~
686

Bukharin said that when one speaks of a hostile act it may
mean anything, including a terrorist act; the amplitude is here very
great. B1;1kharin admits that at the time, the murder of Gorky
was not precluded. This is a veiled admission, which completely
incriminates Bukharin.
I have already spoken of the method by which were committed
the three terrorist acts-against Menzhinsky, against Kuibyshev
and against Alexei Maximovich Gorky.
The method by which these murders were committed is worthv
of attention. It is the method of killing by degrees, "murder with
a guarantee," as Yagoda put it-it is the method of murderinowith the help of the expert knowledge of accomplices. Not a bad
idea! Levin, Pletnev, Kazakov, Maximov-Dikovsky, Kryuchkov
and Bulanov-this gang of murderers, of specially trained murderers, had a hand in this "affair." I should like to draw your
attention to the particular method employed and the particular
role played in the commission of this murder by the accused physicians Levin, Kazakov and Pletnev. But first I would like to
make a few remarks. We know from the history and chronicles
of criminal murder that during the last few decades poisoning
through the aid of professional murderers has practically ceased.
The place of these poisoners has been taken by doctors. If
you examine the handbook on medical jurisprudence by Dr. Karl
Emmert, Professor at the University of Berne, you will find some
extremely edifying remarks. Emmert says:
"Murder by poisoning has become rarer than in former
times, partly because it has become more difficult for laymen
to· obtain poisons. The professional poisoner is therefore not
to be met with as frequently as in the old days. Such as there
are are frequently members of the medical profession.,,
· It is therefore with good reason that Yagoda chooses precisely
doctors for his monstrous design and its realization. He reckons
with historical circumstances, so to speak.
There are a number: of historical examples which show that
all murderers who employ poisons of any kind exert every effort
to escape detection. It is highly characteristic that in a number
of cases poisoning is performed in such a way that the very
poisoning may-as Yagoda had planned-be represented as natural death from disease.
It must first be explained that poisoning effected in accordance
with the modern scientific view is one of the varieties, and the most
dangerous variety, of what is known to science as treacherous murder,
the danger of which lies in the fact that it does not require the use of
any specific substances fatal to human life, and that any substance
may be used for this criminal purpose. History teaches us that all

687

that is required for such a poisoning is to introduce into the organism
any substance capable of curtailing the duration of life, or of causing
death. And these substances are not always what are specifically
termed poisons. There are a number of medicinal substa11ces which
by their very natUie and character are suitable for this, and criminals often take advantage of the fact.
From history, from Tacitus, for example, we know of such cases
as the murder of Seanus by a poison which made it appear that
Seanus died from an ordinary ailment. It is in this that the art of
crime consists. It is a known fact that Philip II made very wide
use of a poison which could not be detected even by the most scrupulous investigation, a poison which he named "Requiescat in
pace" (may he rest in peace). We know that John of Castile was
done to death by means of poisoned footwear. Finally, we know
that Pope Clement II was killed by the fumes of a poisoned candle.
Consequently, it is a known fact that people were killed by murderers who took advantage of their privileged positionand a knowledge of chemistry, medicine. and pharmacology, and who employed
the most varied methods in committing their murders.
We remember the famous case of Buturlin. Buturlin's murderer
was none other than Dr. Panchenko, who was very widely known in
pre-revolutionary Russia and who engaged in the distribution and
application of a medicine known as "Pel 's Spermine." Dr. Panchenko, pretending that he was using "Pel 's Spermine," inoculated the patient with diphtheria bacilli and killed him with
diphtheria.
This was exposed quite by accident. Had it not been for
Dr. Panchenko's confession, Buturlin's murder would probably
never have been disclosed. Had it not been for Levin's confession,
it is possible that the minutely elaborated criminal plan of the
murder of Comrades Menzhinsky, Kuibyshev and Gorky would not
have been disclosed.
·
Finally, I may mention the famous case of Prochar, who caused
his victim to suffer from a chronic gastric catarrh and in this
way brought about her death. And lastly, the case of Dr. Palmer,
who poisoned his victim with arsenic and strychnine, which he
used in doses permitted by medical science. Here, finally, we have
an example which tells us that when we speak of poisoning we
must not think that only potassium cyanide, arsenic, and so
forth, has to be used. No, very frequently murderers use physicians
and medical science ostensibly in order to effect a cure, but
in reality in order to achieve their criminal purpose.
. The cases of Palmer, Prochar, Panchenko and numerous other
historical examples could be cited in proof of the fact that the path
which Yagoda selected was a path suggested by a detailed study
of the history of crime, of the history of .murders which were per-

pss

petrated in various countries by various monsters in human shape.
Finally, I must say that it was precisely on these lines that the
criminal murderers planned a terrorist act against Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhov. For this murder was also planned very craftily-by
means of poisoning the air which Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhov was
to breathe in his office, by poisoning the air with mercury dissolved in an acid. Moreover, Yagoda warned that under no circumstances was sulphuric acid to be used, because sulphuric acid leaves
traces and could burn the window shades and curtains, which, on
Yagoda's instructions, were to be saturated, so that by inhaling
this air Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhov might die.
Comrades judges, I want to recall to your minds some of the
findings of the experts with regard to thic; question, which leave
no room whatever for doubt as to the fact that this very crafty,
perfidious and dastardly plan was conceived by Yagoda with the
knowledge and approval of the Right and Trotskyite centre, particularly in respect of Kuibyshev, Gorky and Nikolai Ivanovich
Yezhov, whom they wanted to get out of the way in order to escape
exposure.
First of all, I draw your attention to the fact that the commi~
sion of experts was made up of foremost representatives of Soviet
and world medical science. I also draw your attention to the fact
that this commission of experts arrived at a unanimous conclusion; the commission of experts confirmed that the means which
the murderers used in bringing about the death of A. M. Gorky,
V. V. Kuibyshev and V.R. Menzhinskywerein fact minutely planned
and that they resulted in the death of these foremost people,
which these gentlemen were striving to bring about.
- In the case of the death of Gorky, the following questions were
put to the commission of experts:
'•Can it be granted that properly qualified physicianscould have
adopted such a. wrong method of .treatment withQtit .malicious
intent?"
_
. The reply was: "It cannot.» · .
Another question put to the commission-of experts:·
"ls it permissible in general for prolonged;Jarge d(}ses of
heart stimulants, namely, digitalis, digalen (extr~cts of -foxglove), strophanthin and strophanthus, to be adminiStered in~
travenously, subcutaneously and internally at the same time,
and, in particular, in the case of the very sick patient
A. M: Gorky, who was sixty-eight years of age, and suffered
from the above-mentioned.affection of the internal organs?"
The reply of the .commission of experts: "Absolutely impermissible.''
Another question: "May it be regarded as established, on the ba44

689

sis of the sum total of these facts, that the method of treatment of
A. M. Gorky was a deliberate act of wrecking? •.. "
The reply of the commission of experts: "Yes, it can be taken
as established beyond doubt."
And we have the same findings in the other cases.
Therefore I make bold to state that the charges contained in the
indictment and sustained by me as the State Prosecutor may be
considered as fully proved in this part also. The charge is here
also entirely and fully corroborated by the findings of a most authoritative commission of medical experts which thoroughly investigated all the materials that were placed at its disposal. Neither,
it is clear, can we discard the confessions of the accused.
In speaking of this part of the charges I want to dwell particularly on two of the accused-Yagoda and Levin.
With regard to Yagoda there is not much to say. Yagoda was
the main organizer and inspirer of these monstrous crimes. His
responsibility is all the greater and graver since, after all, Yagoda
is not just Yagoda, but the man who at that time was Assistant
Chairman of the O.G.P.U., actual Chairman of the O.G.P.U. He
is the man whose duty it was to protect the safety of the state.
If Yagoda had committed only a millionth part of the crimes which
he did commit, and to which he confessed, even then I would be
justified in demanding from the Court that Yagoda be shot.
Levin also played a very important part in these murders. Levin was the main organizer of the murders which had been conceived
by Yagoda; he enlisted the services of both Kazakov and Pletnev
for these purposes; he was, I might say, Yagoda 's right hand in this
business, just as Bulanov was Yagoda's right hand in all of the
latter's crimes in their entirety.
_
When Alexei Maximovich Gorky perished at the hands of Levin, Levin, Doctor of Medical Sciences, published art-obituary in
the newspapers: "The Last Days of Alexei Maximovich Gorky."
In this obituary he wrote, he sighed, he sobbed over the death o~
the great man. "Great men," he wrote pharisaically, hy~ritic­
ally, with duplicity, "live and die like great men." "Live and
die like great men[" Levin did not add: "by the hand of the author
of this obituary, o-ne of the dastardly murderers"!
If we should now consider this article in connection with the
findings of the commission of experts, it would present a certain,
in my opinion, considerable interest for the estimation of Levin's
part in this murder.
In the first place, we find here an exposure of the technique
of bringing about Alexei Maximovich •s death, which has now been
revealed to the full. It is the technique which was primarily directed at the therapeutical preparation of the murder of Alexei
Maximovich.

690

Levin wrote in this obituary:
"ln the ten years during which Alexei Maximovich was
under my medical observation this was the sixth time he fell
ill with the grippe. Each time the grippe invariably caused complications of bronchitis and catarrhal pneumonia."
Hence Levin was already well aware in what direction to look
for complications in this struggle of Alexei M.aximovich Gorky
with his ailment.
"At each attack of the illness this indomitable fighter suffered severely under it, each time there was cause for alarm
from the very first days of his illness. When people asked me during the good calm periods of Alexei Maximovich's life about
the state of his health, I always answered:
"'Comparatively well, but only till the first grippe.'"
A.nd further:
"l knew from experience what a severe course the grippe
takes in the case of Alexei Maximovich, how rapidly it affects
his lungs-the place of least resistance in his system-and
how frightful it is with his lungs transmuted owing to an old
tubercular process and with his sick heart. Thus, his powerful constitution made it possible for us to emerge victorious
for five times, and Alexei Maximovich's constitution was
powerful indeed. Gorky was of those people who live to be
a hundred, and he would undoubtedly have lived to be a hun·
dred if not for the vicious tuberculosis.,.
The murderer is gLving away the secret of the murder. It is
precisely here where the place of least resistance lies-physicians
call it locus minoris resistentiae-and it was to this spot that the
perpetrators of the murder directed their main blow aimed at the
.
sick A. M. Gorky.
Shameful duplicity, perfidy, hypocrisy are here rivalled by
the shamelessness of the poisoner, who weeps at the bed of the victim of his so-called "treatment."
That is the kind of man this Levin represents! Not so much
difference between him and Yagodat
In conclusion, I should like to remind you of Yagoda 's evidence,
in which he shows his real moral and human, if this expression
could be used here, countenance. Here are extracts from Yagoda 's
evidence, on p. 58 of the record.
"All my life I wore a mask, I posed as an irreconcilable
Bolshevik. Actually, I neveF was a Bolshevik in the real
sense."
And further:
"My petty-bourgeois origin, lack of theoretical . tra_in-ing-:-:-ail ~his brought it about that from the very begrnmng
691

of the organization of the Soviet power l had no faith in the
final victory of the cause of the Party.''. . .
"l did not share the views and the program of the Trotskyites, but still I followed the course -0f the struggle with great
attention, having made up my mind beforehand that I would
join the side which emerged victorious from this struggle.
Hence the special line which I pursued during that period in
the fight with Trotskyisrn.
"When measures of repression began to be taken against
the Trotskyites, the question as to who would come out the
victor (the Trotskyites or the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union) was as yet not finally settled. In any event, that was what I thought. Therefore I, as Assistant Chairman of the O.G.P.U., in carrying out the punitive
policy, did it in a way that would not arouse the anger of the
Trotskyites against me. When I was sending Trotskyites into
exile, I created for them such conditions in their places of
exile as enabled them to continue their activity.
"Things took the following shape: on the one hand, my
conversations with Rykov determined my personal sympathy
for the program of the Rights. On the other hand, from all
that Rykov told me about the Rights, about the fact that,
besides himself, Bukharin, Tomsky and Uglanov, the Rights
had on their side the entire Moscow organization, the Leningrad organization and the trade unions-all this created the
impression in my mind that the Rights might win in the struggle with the Central Committee. And since at that time
they already raised the question of changing the leadership of
the Party and of the Soviet government, it was clear that
the Rights were heading for power.
"It was precisely for the reason that to my mind the
Rights seemed a real power that I told Rykov that I was
on their side.
"That is why I came to an understanding with 'Rykov
about the special position which I was to occupy among the
Rights.,,
So it turns out that Rykov quite definitely influenced even
Yagoda. For, essentially, what Yagoda is speaking about is the old
school of treachery and duplicity, the school of a political careerist
and infamous scoundrel; it is the system of Joseph Fouche. I cannot refrain from citing only a few lines from Stefan Zweig's wellknown book "Joseph Fouche.,,
"Among the seven hundred and fifty who solemnly entered the hall of the dethroned king, silently, with a tri-colour
band across his breast, enters the people's representative,
Joseph Fouche, deputy for the city of Nantes. His tonsure al-

69Z

ready. grown over with hair, the clerical garb discarded long
ago, like everyone else here, he wears civilian clothes without
any decorations.
'
"Where will Joseph Fouche take his seat? Among the Radicals, on the Mountain, or with the Moderates, in the Valley?
Joseph Fouche does not hesitate too long; he recognizes only
on~ pa!ty, to which he will remain true to the end: the party
which 1s th.e strongest, the party of the majority. And this time,
too, he weighs the pros and cons and counts under his breath
the number of votes; he sees that at the present moment the
power is still with the Gironde, with the Moderates. And so he
takes his seat on their benches, next to Condorcet, Roland,
Servan, to those who hold ministerial posts, influence all
appointments and distribute the spoils. In their midst he
feels himself at ease, that is where he takes his seat."
That is the source from which Yagoda drew his spiritual strength,
if ever he was acquainted with the life and activities of Joseph
Fouche. I doubt it, because in the testimony and in the records of
the case we find only one mention of his acquaintance with literature, and that refers to Alexandre Dumas' "The Three Musketeers," who were Yagoda's ideal, for, as it appears from the testimony given by Bulanov, Yagoda used to say that, in order to
ensure success in seizing power, it was necessary to select a few
dozen dashing fellows like the thr.ee musketeers, with whos~ help
one could do anything one liked.
Such is Yagoda, who occupies a position of importance in
the dock next to Bukharin and Rykov. He is one of the biggest
plotters, one of the foremost enemies of the Soviet power, one of
the most brazen traitors, a man who tried to organize a group in
the very People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs and who partly
organized one, consisting of the traitors Pauker, Volovich, Gai,
Vinetsky, and others who turned out to be Polish and German spies
and intelligence service agents. Such a one was Yagoda himself,
who instead of directing our glorious intelligence service to promote
the interests of the Soviet people, the interests of Socialist construction, tried to turn it against our people, against our revolution,
against Socialism.
The attempt failed, it miscarried! Y,agoda was exposed, he was
thrown out of our state apparatus, put in the dock, disarmed, and
now he must be thrown out, he must be completely eradicated
from life.
I am coming to the end. In conclusion I want to raise a few questions which I would describe as legal questions.
First of all, the question of complicity. The Court investigation has shown that not all the accused participated to an equal
extent in the crimes which were reviewed at this trial.
693

Hence the question: To what extent and in what degree can
and should each of the accused be held answerable for the charges
·
preferred against them in_ the indictment?_
The second question: To what extent and in what degree have
the charges preferred against the accused been proved?
And the third question: What punishment do the accused deserve?
I shall answer the second question first. Have the crimes committed by the accused been proved, and in what degree? I think
that in your verdict, Comrades judges, you will reply to this question in the affirmative: Yes, they have been proved. They have
been proved by the confessions of the accused themselves, they have
been proved by the witnesses who appeared before the Court, they
have been proved by the findings of the medical expert investigation, they have been proved by material evidence.
We have here the sum total of proofs conceivable in criminal
proceedings; it is now at the disposal of the Court. On the basis
of these proofs the Court will be able to pass its final· decision
with regard to the degree of guilt of one or the other of the criminals who committed these crimes.
But there is one more very important proof, and that is the
logic itself of the circumstances of the case.
The main charge preferred against the accused in the present
case is covered by Articles 581 a and 5811, dealing with the organization of treasonable conspiracy. This charge has bee11 proved by
the confessions of all the accused, including those who did not admit their guilt in full or who admitted only- part of their guilt
!n another crime. This must be said with regard to all the accused.
Secondly, according to our law, to what extent must each of
the accused be held answerable for the aggregate of the crimes committed by this gang of conspirators. To this question I answer:
Fully. Why?
Each of the accused must be held answerable for the sum
total of the crimes as a member of a conspiratorial -0rganization whose criminal objects and aims, and whose criminal methods
of carrying out these aims, .wer.e known to, approved of and accepted
by each of the accused. Here we observe only a peculiar· "division
of labour" in criminal activities, depending on the special qualities and means which each member of the gang possessed. This is
entirely natural and logical from ·the point of view of the conspiracy as a whole.
· Thereis an opinion current among criminolagists that in order
to establish complicity it is necessary -to establish common agre~­
. ment and an intent on the part of each of the criminals, of the accomplices, for each of the crimes. This viewpoint is wrong. We
cannot accept it and we have never applied or accepted it. It is

·694

narrow and scholastic. Life is broader than this viewpoint. Life
knows of examples when the results of joint criminal activity are
brought about through the independent participation in such
activity by individual accomplices, who are united only by a
single criminal object common to all of them.
.
To establish complicity, we must establish that there is a common line uniting the accomplices in a given crime, that there
is a common criminal design. To establish complicity, it is necessary to establish the existence of a united will directed toward a
single object common to all the participants in the crime. If, say,
a gang of robbers will act in such a way that one part of its
members will set fire to houses, violate women, murder and so
on, in one place, while another part of the gang will do the same
in another place, then even if neither the one nor the other knew of
the crimes committed separately by any section of the common
gang, they will be held answerable to the full for the sum total of the
crimes, if only it is proved that they had agreed to participate in
this gang for the purpose of committing the various crimes.
In this case, Comrades judges, we are dealing with a conspiratorial group, with an agency of foreign intelligence services, united by a will common to all its members, by a criminal aim which
is the same for all of them. The concrete crimes which were committed by the individual criminals were only particular cases of
putting.into effect this plan of criminal activities, which was common to all of them.
· . Tliis community of criminal activity is legally expressed in the
charge preferred against all the accused and dealt with in Article
5811 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.
This, however, does not mean that all must answer to the same
extent.; This does not preclude the obligation for the Court to
individualize the punishment according to the concrete part of each
of the accused in the present case.
From this point of view, I thi~k that of all the accused, two
should be singled out-I refer to Rakovsky and Bessonov. I think
that Rakovsky, although he committed very grave crimes against
the Soviet state, against the Soviet power, still, owing to his
entire position in this conspiracy, owing to the fact that he was
in a certain way, if one may say so, isolated from the most important crimes committed by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,"
deserves that with regard to him a less severe measure of punishment
should be applied than with regard to the rest of the accused.
To a certain extent the ·same may be said about Bessonov, who,
of course, differs from Chernov, Rosengoltz, Krestinsky or Rykov,
even if for the reason that his part was confined to the role of a
liaison man, which, although it is alsu criminal, must be considered
695

in its essence as different from the crimes of the main accused
in the present case.
With regard to these persons I should consider it possible to
apply the law of October 2, 1937, which permits the Court, in special cases, to a_Pply a measure of punishment ranging between
ten years' deprivation of liberty and the supreme measure of social
protection. I think that with regard to Rakovsky and Bessonov
the Court might confine its sentence to 25 years' imprisonment.
All the accused stand convicted of having, according to the
indictment, in 1932-33 organized, on the instructions of intelligence services of foreign states, a conspiratorial group called
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," which set itself the aim of
committing the crimes which have been fully proved here.
It has been proved that this bloc consisted of agents of the intelligence services of several foreign states, it has been proved that
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" maintained regular
illegitimate relations with certain foreign states with the object
of obtaining their help for putting into effect its criminal
designs, for the overthrow of the Soviet government and for establishing the power of the landlords and capitalists in the U.S.S.R.
It has been proved that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"
regularly engaged in espionage on behalf of these states and supplied their intelligence services with most important state secret
material.
It has been proved that in pursuance of the same aims the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites" systematically perpetrated wrecking
and diversionist acts in various branches of our national economyin the sphere of industry, agriculture, finance, municipal economy, railways, etc.
It has been proved that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"
organized a number of terrorist acts against leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) and of the Soviet
government, that this "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" perpetrated
terrorist acts against S. .M. Kirov, V. R. Menzhinsky. V. V. Kuibyshev, A. M. Gorky, and also brought about the death of M. A
Peshkov,
It has been proved that the bloc had organized, but fortunately for us had not succeeded in effecting, a number of·terrorist
acts against the leaders of our Party and government.
Such are the circumstances of the present case. Such is the part
taken in this case by each of the accused who are now awaiting
your verdict, Comrades judges.
There exist no words with which one could depict the monstrousness of the crimes committed by the accused. But, I ask, do we
need any more words for that? No, Comrades judges, these words
are not needed. All the words have already been spoken. Eve~ything
696

has been analysed to the minutest details. The entire people now
sees what these monsters are.
Our people and all honest people throughout the world are
waiting for your just verdict. May this verdict of yours resound
through the whole of our great country like a bell calling
to new feats of heroism and to new victories! May your verdict
resound as the refreshing and purifying thunderstorm of just
Soviet punishment!
Our whole country, from young to old, is awaiting and demanding one thing: the traitors and spies who were selling our country
to the enemy must be shot like dirty dogs!
Our people are demanding one thing: crush the accursed reptile!
Time will pass. The graves of the hateful traitors will grow
over with weeds and thistle, they will be covered with the eternal
contempt of honest Soviet citizens, of the entire Soviet people.
But over us, over our happy country, our sun will shine with its
luminous rays as bright and as joyous as before. Over the road
cleared of the last scum and filth of the past, we, our people, with
our beloved leader and teacher, the great Stalin, at our head, will
march as before onwards and onwards, towards Communism!
THE PRESIDENT: The Court is adjourned until 8 p. m.
[Signed}

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Jurist
Preswent of the Military loUegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATI\'ER
Military Jurist First Rank

EVENING SESSION, MARCH 11, 1938

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is corning, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Comrade Braude, member of the Collegium of Defence, will
~~~

~

BRAUDE: Comrades judges! The characteristic feature of present-day conspiratorial counter-revolutionary organizations is that
they have no mass support.
At the Plenum of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U. held
in March 1937 Comrade Stalin said: "The present-day Trotskyites
are afraid to show their real face to the working class, are afraid
to reveal to it their real aims and objects, carefully hide their
political face from the working class, fearing that if the working
class learns about their real intentions it will curse them as people
alien to it and drive them away.''
We see, Comrades judges, that for the technical fulfilment of
their wrecking designs these conspirators have only their own
insignificant forces and foreign intelligence services on which to
count. Only by deception, double-dealing and blackmail did they
succeed in drawing into their villainous crimes individual persons
whose outlook has nothing in common with them.
Indeed, Levin, an old doctor, an individual who is far from a
counter-revolutionary outlook and from counter-revolutionary
aims, was drawn through the enemy Yagoda into the organization
of Rights and Troskyites to commit monstrous crimes while
Yagoda himself wanted to stand aside.
And today, Comrades judges, I have to defend this old man,
Dr. Levin, who towards the end of his life has come to be technical
executor of the specific designs of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," about the very existence of which he had hardly any idea,
and not only the technical executor, but, as the Procurator correctly stated today, one who also undertook a certain organizing
role. How could it have come about, how could it have happened,
that a doctor of forty years' standing, a man who was close to
Maxim Gorky, the doctor of Kuibyshev and Menzhinsky, should
become the murderer of his patients?
In studying the materials of the preliminary investigation, of
698

the examination of Bulanov, Yagoda, Levin and the other accused,
I saw that the investigating authorities themselves had taken an
interest in how Levin could· have undertaken such horrible commissions,· in what it was that held him back from Offering the
necessary resistance to Yagoda. The Procurator asked Levin here:
"Why did you not attempt to resist Yagoda?" And, formulati~
Levin's reply, the Procurator said: "You had no support within
yourself, and you did not seek for it from without."
But such a reply does not solve the question as to why he had
no support within himself, and why Levin did not seek for it
from without.
In order to attempt to reply to this question, it seems to me
·that it is necessary to go somewhat into the past of our intelligentsia.
I think I shall not be committing a big error if I say that in
casting a retrospective glance over the past and analysing the
present of this intelligentsia, one may divide it into three groups.
The first group is the insignificant, SPJall section of that bourgeois intelligentsia that occupied key positions with the capitalists
in the past, and that later had to work with the Soviet power.
Over a number of years this small group manifested itself by engaging in counter-revolutionary wrecking in all spheres of our economy,
as one of the forms of the class struggle. This wrecking assumed
· the most varied forms. Call to mind the Shakhty wreckers, call to
mind the case of the Industrial Party.
The wrecking organizations were crushed by the organs of the
People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, by our Court authorities,
but individual remnants of them maintained their existence here
and there, escaped destruction and continued to manifest themselves from time to time. The anti-Soviet sentiments of individual
representatives of this section of the intelligentsia constitute a
field for the work of counter-revolutionary organizations and for
foreign intelligence services.
. There is a second group, which is also not such a big one, made
up of that section of the petty-bourgeois intelligentsia that took
no part in sabotage, and that worked honestly together with the
Soviet power for ·a number of subsequent years. But these people
remained mere specialists in their own line and did not merge
organically either with the Party or with Uie working class. They
imagined that to have the right ·to be called Soviet specialists
it .was sufficient for them to work only at their own specialities.
They b_ear all the features of philistines, of petty-bourgeois, and
experienced agents of the enemy frequently make use of these
features of theirs to recruit them into their ranks.
And finally, thei:e is the third group-of the real Soviet intelligentsia, which constitutes the greatest part of our intelligentsia, its

699

<>verwhelming majority. This is the new Soviet intelligentsia
which has come from the midst of the working class, which has
enriched itself with the treasures of the old and the new cultures, which has passed through the severe schooling of the class
struggle. To this group belongs,-in particular, a considerable section
of the old specialists, who have merged organically with the working
class and adopted its splendid features, its vigilance and ability
to discern class enemies. These are the people who have the right
to the honoured title of "non-Party Bolsheviks."
Had Yagoda approached one of the representatives of this
really Soviet intelligentsia, which constitutes the majority of
intellectuals in our country, with his base suggestions, he would
immediately have been exposed, and the counter-revolutionary,
criminal, bandit organization would have been uncovered several
years earlier.
.
The three doctors now in the dock cannot, of course, be classed
in the category of representatives of the real Soviet intelligentsia.
I am defending Dr. Levin. Prior to 1934 Dr. Levin worked very
conscientiously, showing great professional knowledge, in various
hospitals, medical organizations, scientific societies. He treated
Lenin and was a close acquaintance of Gorky. He enjoyed the
confidence of Kuibyshev. He sincerely imagined that this proximity
gave him the right to call himself an honest Soviet specialist. But
he did not understand that this proximity was a mechanical one,
that politically he was far from them. Levin was apolitical. He does
not even have a clear notion as to what the Mensheviks are. In
answer to a question as to his party affiliations, he replied here in
Court that he belonged to the physicians' party. His reply brings out
all his craft isolation from the working class_ In reply to a question
from the Procurator he stated that he was a coward, and the materials in the case, unfortunately, allow of no doubt on this point.
Add to this that he is very wishy-washy, and inclined towards panic,
and you will have a portrait of Levin as of a specialist belonging
to the second group of the intelligentsia that I mentioned.
In recruiting the doctors according to the recipes of the fascist
intelligence services, Yagoda adopted an individual approach
to each one of them. Let us see what Yagoda himself said about
this at the preliminary investigation. His attitude towards Pletnev
was that of an outright bully: he collected compromising material
about him. According to him, "Pletnev belonged to some sort of
anti-Soviet grouping, and Wt,J._S an anti-Soviet person generally."
Yagoda made use of this.
He influenced Kazakov through intimidation, and at the same
time a·roused the hope in him that he would render him some aid
in his struggle against a group of doctors.
Yagoda took advantage of Kryuchkov's mercenary traits,
700

inspiring him with the hope that after Maxim;s death he would
become Gorky's literary heir, and, on the other hand, he also
intimidated him by pointing out that he, Yagoda, was aware of the
fact that Kryuchkov had embezzled money belonging to Gorky.
And he had Kryuchkov under his thumb.
The Procurator stated that Levin was Yagoda 's right handthat he, together with Yagoda, was the organizer. ·Formafly, thrs
is correct. But if Levin was Yagoda's right hand, it must not be
forgotten for a moment that the brain guiding this right hand was
Yagoda. And the fact that Levin came to be Yagoda 's right hand
was simply a matter of chance. Yagoda knew Levin. Levin had the
entree to the sick, to the splendid people whom the "bloc of Rights
artd Trotskyites" was interested in removing. Yagoda worked
over Levin for a long time, and did so very cunningly and subtly.
There was nothing shady in Levin's past history, no anti-Soviet
sentiments; he had forty years of irreproachable work to his credit.
Prior to his conversation with Yagoda he had-been devoted to the
Soviet government and probably had been attached to Gorky.
Yagoda had to overcome Levin's internal resistance, and Yagoda
spent a long, a very long time, in the endeavour to win him over,
employing subtle methods which outdo the Jesuit methods of Ignatius Loyola. With the cunning of a foreign intelligence service
agent he played on Levin~s faint-heartedness, irresoluteness,
vanity, credulity and timidity.
Yagoda himself testified that Levin was Peshkov's family
physician and frequented Gorky's place; he naturally encountered
Levin on more than one occasion. That is just why Yagoda directed
his attention towards Levin and made him his right hand. He
knew him, frequently came in contact with him in particular, and
not with Pletnev or Kazakov.
Levin was needed to carry through criminal designs, and so
Yagoda began to develop a closer interest in him and to pay attention
to him. How was this attention expressed? Levin himself and Bulanov have spoken of it: French wine, flowers, facilitating customs
formalities, dollars for a trip abroad. All this took place asa gradual
process of winning Levin over, extending over many months, and
perhaps many years, for Yagoda hadbeencharged by the "Rightand
Trotskyite centre" long ago. Therefore these efforts to win him
over extended over a prolonged period of time prior to the outright
commission of the crime.
Levin, of course, did not and could not understand what it
was all about. He naively imagined that Yagoda was doing this
out of respect for his persona! merits and qualities as a doctor.
This agreeably tickled his sense of vanity-and Levin does not
hide the fact that he was vain.
But Yagoda took excellent stock of this. Together with his
701

gratitude· fer the ·generosity and attentiveness of Yagoda, Levin

'Qegan to feel a certain peculiar sort of dependence, which is just

what Yagoda was aiming af.

·
Tlie hour arrived for the carrying through of Yagoda 's nefarious
designs against Max Peshkov. I must tell you, Comrades Judges,
that as I listened· to Yagoda 's explanations about the reasons for
the murder of Max Peshkov, I came to the conclusion that the
reasons here were of a twofold nature: Yagoda 's profoundly base
reason, and the commission.given by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' to inflict such a psychological blow on Gorky through .the
murder of his beloved son as would sti 11 further weaken the physical
power of resistance of the great writer in his struggle against his
illness. Yagoda 's base personal motives undoubtedly coincided with
the line of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites.,,
What does Yagoda say about this? At one point in his testimony
he says literally the following: "l fostered within myself the idea
cif physically murdering Max Peshkov. He was in my way." At
first there was the idea of murdering Max Peshkov with the aid
of bandits, but it appeared dangerous to draw many people into
such a crime, and the idea arose among the ringleaders of the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" that the best way to bring about
the death of Max Peshkov was "death from disease."
I draw the attention of the Court to· the fact that the idea of
"death from disease" did not enter into or originate in the minds
of the doctors. This idea originated with Yagoda, with the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyi tes." And he forced it on the doctors. While
still under examination by the investigation authorities, in reply
to a question as to "how is this to be understood?"-Yagoda said,
"Very simply. A person naturally falls ill; he is sick for some time;
those who surround him become accustomed, as is als'o natural,
to the idea of the patient's either dying or recuperating. The
physician who treats the patient can facilitate either the recovery
of the patient or his death.•.. '' " .•• Well, and all the rest is
a matter. of technique.''
A doctor was needed to put this idea into effect. It was convenient to accomplish this black deed with the hands of others,
with the hands of a doctor, while himself remaining aside.
Yagoda also employed theoretical arguments to win over Levin.
Yagoda unfolded to Levin a peculiar "theory" which bore traces
of the influence over him of the German fascist advocates of sterilization. Yagoda himself has testified that in the effort to win Levin
over he employed theoretical arguments acquired from outside
sources, as to the right of a doctor to put an end to a patient's life.
"In a talk with Leyin I began with the abstract question as to
whether a doctor should assist in bringing about the ·death of his
patient. On receiving -a posi.tive r~ply, _tasked him whether he

702

understood that patients are sometimes an obstacie to people around
them, and that the death of such patients would be met with joy.
Levin said that this was a debatable question, that a doctor had
no right to put an end to the life of a human being,, .of a sick person.
But I argued with him and pointed out that he was backward, and
that 'we' (this should be underst~od as meanirg modern people)
held another point of view. I had several conversations with Levin
on this subject."
But this proved to be insufficient. Levin apparently did not
accept these ·"theoretical inoculations." Then Yagoda endeavoured to present the plan for murdering Maxim Peshkov as an
act necessary in the interests of the state, and primarily in the interests of Gorky himself. He pointed out how fatal was Peshkov's
influence over his father. In further conversations he stressed the
point thatthe instruction to put an end to Maxim Peshkov was not
his, Yagoda 's, instruction, but that of a group of most responsible
leading officials. In proof of this, in order that no doubts should
be left in Levin's mind, he arranged a meeting between him and
Yenuki dze, who_ at that ti me occupied the v.ost of Secretary of the
Central Executive Committee of the U.S.S.R. and who personally
expressed to Levin approbation of the plan of murder by "death
from disease." _
Why did not Levin expose this fascist gang? I have already
spoken of his apolitical, irresolute nature and lack of character.
But here, of course, the main role was played by the combination
of methods employed against him by Yagoda. Levin was certain
that Yagoda would stop at nothing.
At one point in his testimony Levin said with a shudder: "On
every occasion I would call to mind Yagoda 's terrible face and
threats. Yagoda '_s speech made a .terrible impression on me."
Levin, this wishy-washy intellectual, this old, non-Party, credulous doctor, devoid of will power, tr"embled not so much for himself as for his family, which Yagoda had threatened to destroy.
Am I not entitled, Comrades judges, to say that Levin was mentally terrorized by. Yagoda, and that this also explains the role
he played in these ghastly murders? Levin testified: "I felt myself
enslaved by Yagoda; it was clear to me that at the first attempt to
refuse to fulfil the tasks set by Yagoda or even should there be
accidental failure threatening to. lead to discovery, not only would
l perish, but so would my family." He spoke of this. He took part
in bringing about the death of Maxim Peshkov and then began
the chain of the subsequent horrible crimes; Maxim Peshkov was
followed by Kuibyshev, Kuibyshev by Maxim Gorky and Menzhinsky. What, then, were the motives impelling Levin to carry
out these.further awful charges of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites ''?

703

An old l:(ussian proverb says: "Once the claw is caught, the
whole bird is Jost." Having committed one crime, feeling himself
bound to Yagoda by bonds of crime, it was still more difficult for
Levin to get away from his influence.
.
Yagoda understood this, and his tone towards Levin changed
sharply. He began to talk to him bullyingly, in a threatening language. With cynical candour he put his cards on the table before
Levin, explained to him in whose interests Levin was acting, and
the apolitical, non-Party Levin willy-nilly became a politician.
While not sharing the convictions of these gentlemen, Levin
was in fact with them. He understood that, having become their
accomplice, he could not but fulfil their instructions. Having
bound himself up with counter-revolution and the criminal deeds
of the organization, he shared Yagoda 's fate. Such is the logic of
counter-revolution.
But, Comrades judges, did Levin really yield to Yagoda in
his awful commissions without any internal resistance, without a
mental struggle? I allow that Levin's epically tranquil relation here
of his crimes could produce the impression of his being a dullwitted vivisector, when taken in connection with the letter to the
press published by Levin after Gorky's death. But this letter was
not Levin's creation, it was written at the time when Levin was
completely under Yagoda's influence, and as far as I am concerned
I have no doubt but that it was written at Yagoda 's dictation.
The jesuitic and pharisaic character of this letter must be placed
entirely to the account of Yagoda.
If one examines Levin's testimony and letters, one can become
convinced that he underwent a pi:ofound mental strain. He lived
in a torment of frenzy. While in custody, he wrote a letter to Comrade Yezhov in which he made a clean breast of everything, wrote
that the memory of his awf~l misdeeds weighed heavily on him.
He wrote: ''During these years I felt that I was cut off from my P?St
life by heavy gates which Yagoda held to with an iron hand and
which I was unable to open. In the autumn of 1936, '' he wrote
in a letter, "I learnt that Yagoda was no longer People's Commissar
of Internal Affairs and experienced a feeling of supreme happiness; I decided to devote the rest of my life to my former honest
work, to devote my remaining strength to the happiness of the
peoples, to devote all my strength, knowledge, experience and love
to the sick, to the further prosperity of our splendid fatherland,
for the happiness and well-being of which I could contribute a
mite of labour. But the tormenting memory of my great crimes
burdened my soul like a rock. Now, in prison, having related all
that has taken place in my mind, I have felt a profound relief."
I am profoundly convinced that when he wrote this confession,
laying his soul bare to Comrade Yezhov, he could not but f.eel re704

lief, feel liberated of the infinitely heavy burden he had hidden
till then. And when he spoke of his crimes here, before the Court
of the people, before the Court of the working class he continued
to feel this relief.
I am drawing to a close, Comrades judges.
What should be done with Levin? I will not hide from you that
at this moment, when I raise the question as to what should be
done with Levin, the infinitely dear features of Maxim Gorky, the
great writer, our national pride, the pride of the whole of toiling
mankind, appear before my mind's eye, as do the features of that
ardent Bolshevik, Comrade Kuibyshev, and of that uncompromising fighter against the enemies of the people, that man of encyclopaedic erudition, Comrade Menzhinsky. Had it not been for
the crimes of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," committed
through the hands of Levin and two other doctors, these great
people would have been alive now, and by their active, creative
and splendid lives would have hr.ought no small benefit to the
cause of the building of Socialism, which they served all their
lives and which is served by all the politically mature people
of our country.
But nevertheless, Comrades judges, I still say that despite the
weight of these thoughts, Levin should remain alive, although he
should be given a very severe punishment. Your sentence
is now awaited by these gentlemen in the prisoners' dock, who
have committed a series of the most heinous crimes, who from the
day of the revolution have fought against their people, against
the working class, against the Party, against the independence of
their country. They are the actual murderers of Gorky, Kuibyshev
and Menzhinsky, but they are also guilty in that three doctors became murderers. This also lies at their door. They are
the murderers of these doctors. For their nefarious ends they made
murderers of people foreign to their criminal views, to their criminal activity. They transformed the art of an old doctor in helping suffering mankind into a weapon of death in his hands. Had
Levin not met them, he would have lived peacefully to the end of
his days, rendering aid to sufferers.
So, then, can an equal sign be placed between Levin and
these gentlemen, however heinous his personal crimes? And while
they, these gentlemen, are useless and worthless in the coming
struggle for the happiness of mankind, old Dr. Levin can still live
the few years which remain him, and attempt to expiate at least
a part of his crimes by helping suffering mankind. I ask you to
spare Dr. Levin his life.
THE PRESIDENT: Comrade Kornrnodov, member of the Collegium of Defence, will now speak.
COUNSEL FOR DEFENCE KOMMODOV: I think, Comrades
45

705

judges, that there is no need for me to tell you how difficult is the
task of Defence Counsel in the present case. This difficulty is
rendered greater by the stern demand of the State Prosecutor, which
has met with universal endorsement by Soviet public opinion.
But as far as our abilities and strength permit, it behooves us to
O'ather at least bit by bit the arguments that will make it possible
for us to ask, and for you perhaps to satisfy our request, and to
depart from the stern demand that rang out from the lofty tribune
of the State Prosecutor in relation to our clients.
The crimes of Levin, the crimes of Kazakov, the crimes of Pletnev are undoubtedly one link in a very long chain of crimes, which
in their sum total characterize the methods, modes and means of
struggle employed against the Soviet power by its enemies throughout the course of these twenty years.
This struggle died down at times only to burst forth again with
greater force. Especially has it revived in recent years-a fact
that must undoubtedly be connected with the advent to power of
fascism, which found loyal allies in the shape of all the counterrevolutionary parties within the Union.
Fascism as a form of government is based on the degradation of
mankind and cannot reconcile itself with the existence of a country
where the system of social life is based on the principle of social justice and respect for human dignity. That is why the struggle
against the Soviet Union has been placed on the order of the day by
fascism as a most urgent task. And, as a matter of fact, they do not
hide this. Bring to mind, Comrades judges, the September 1936
Nuremberg Congress, the leaders of the fascist party, who openly
and cynically preached a crusade against the Soviet power.
Several months prior to this, an article was printed in the Polish paper "Bunt Mlodich" ("Revolt of Youth") which stated:
"We consider the main thing for modern Poland to be the need to
smash the Germano-Russian pincers in which Poland finds itself
today. In view of the fact that the struggle of over-populated Poland against over-populated Germany is simply absurd, we must
destroy Russia ... deprive her of her hegemony in the East, and
acquire the land we need for colonization at the expense of Russia.''
In printing this item, "Pravda" correctly called these young
people brainless. But it is characteristic that the struggle against
the Soviet Union is carried on openly through the press. To this
should be added an item in the Japanese newspaper "Reki-siKoren," which was reprinted by "Pravda," and in which a Japanese official, Sigotomi, discusses the idea of the same food for
horses and for men in the future war. And his point of departure
was as follows: the rice required by the Japanese will not grow at
the war fronts, while the available food reserves will freeze there.
It is absolutely clear that what is referred to here is not a war

706

in Singapore, but a war in cold Russia; it is clear that they are
openly and cynically preaching a crusade against the Soviet Union.
Thus the struggle against the Soviet Union by fascism has been
placed on the order of the day as an urgent task. What means do
they employ in the fight against us? I would say-all means by which
in their opinion they can weaken the Soviet Union and lead to the
destruction of the Soviet Union, which help or can help them in the
coming war. Do not seek, Comrades judges, for scruples as to the
means of struggle. One of the characteristic features of the advent
of the fascists to power is the complete corruption of public morals.
The methods of struggle against the Soviet Union are espionage,
wrecking, acts of diversion and murder, support for armed gangs,
terror, etc.-an entire assortment of means designed to bring about
the weakening and crushing of the Soviet Union. The Procurator has
cited here to you innumerable cases of espionage, wrecking and terror.
The forms of wrecking have changed somewhat in recent times;
I would say they have become more subtle and more dangerous.
Remember the wrecking activities spoken of by Chernov, former People's Commissar of Agriculture, and by Khodjayev-the
wrecking in agriculture and in sericulture. The accused Chernov
related how on his instructions a plague bacillus was cultivated
without its virulence being destroyed. Whole factories were set
up which supplied these preparations as prophylactic means,
whereas actually they were a means of spreading infection.
As far as I am concerned, it is clear to me that with such wrecking work carried through on the instructions of Chernov and Khodjayev, there were also undoubtedly people who suffered innocently.
Khodjayev said here literally the following: we hit and hit
hard at those who opposed the operation of these wrecking measures.
To use Khodjayev's words, they carried through these wrecking
measures under the guise of mechanization, and those who resisted
them they accused of anti-Soviet sentiments and dealt with them.
And so it seems to me that many local officials suffered thereby;
many local officials who did not suspect all the monstrous designs
of the enemy were the victims of these individuals.
In terrorist activity new methods of removing political leaders
have also appeared. It should be stated that in the fascist countries terrorism is particularly widespread. It is valued there not
only as a means of removing unwanted people, but mainly as a
means of provoking war as well. I will say more-there are theoreticians who have found an ideological basis for justifying terrorism
as a means of struggle against the Soviet Union. Very characteristic in this connection is the report of a certain Professor Radulescu at the Fourth Conference for the Unification of Criminal
Legislation, held in Paris. At this conference Professor Radulescu was the official reporter on the question of terror ism. And
45

707

it is interesting how this professor disclosed the meaning and content of this international delictum in his report: "It is a matter of
attempts undertaken either with the aim of violently destroying
all political and legal organization of society, attempts characteristic of the anarchists, or with the aim of violently overthrowing
the economic and social order of the majority of the modern states,
attempts characteristic of revolutionary Communism. Revolutionary
Communism,'' continues Radulescu, "in our days constitutes one
of the most dangerous threats to public order in general."
I repeat, he was the official reporter on the question of terrorism, quite openly and cynically preaching terrorism against the
leaders of Communism, against the revolutionary movement.
One could point further to the attempt at the Brussels Conference
of the fascist criminologist Garofolo, to place the actions of the
working people fighting for liberation from the yoke of exploitation,
from the capitalist yoke, on a par with those of international
thieves and counterfeiters. With such an understanding of terrorism, ideologically justified against the Soviet Union, and not only
against the Soviet Union, but against the leaders of the Communist
movement in general, what is there surprising, then, in the fact
that terrorist activity has revived in all countries of the world, and
terrorist acts are occurring in all parts of the globe? This activity
has revived in our country as well. There has also been a refinement, I would say, in the methods and modes of terrorist acts,
and the method employed in the present case, i nrelation to Comrades
Menzhinsky, Kuibyshev and Gorky, is a fundamentally new one.
You remember, Comrades judges, the period of kulak terrorism
which existed in the years 1929-30-31, when many honest and
active Soviet workers, village librarians, village newspaper correspondents, perished. You remember that the usual means employed in committing these terrorist acts was the sawed-off shotgun, the axe, the dagger, the knife. Later on we see how terrorist
acts were carried through according to a definite, organized plan.
Call to mind the murder of that people's tribune, Sergei Mironovich
Kirov. From the Pyatakov trial and the present trial we know
that terrorist groups were organized throughout the Soviet Union.
One of the methods of murder in the present case is the method
characterized by Yagoda as "death from disease." I must say that
the history of human malefactions does not know of such a method.
Comrade the Procurator cited cases of numerous poisoning by doctors, characteristic of the Middle Ages. Quite right. The entire history of the Florentine Republic during the days of the Borgias and
Medici, was full of cases of poisoning. Frequently they too resorted
to the aid of physicians. Pope Alexander VI, having poisoned
Cardinal Orsini with the assistance of doctors, cynically told the
College of Cardinals that "we placed him in the hands of the very
708

best doctors." At that time poisoning, as a means of doing away:
with people, was usually practised through some medium such as_
·
gloves, books, flowers, perfumes, furniture.
But what Yagoda devised bears a far more subtle character.
I know of no such example in Russian practice. I have read in Stendhal's novels of something Ii ke it in the days of the Medici, but
I know of no other examples. At first Pletnev also understood this
method as a proposal to use poison, but Yagoda told him, "No, that
is crude, too crude and dangerous; the thing to do is to employ a
suitable method of treatment to hasten the end of the people whom
you wi II be called on to treat.''
Any employment of poison is undoubtedly more dangerous than
the method that has begun to be employed in recent times, particularly in the present case. Although there are poisons which
vanish rapidly they leave traces of pathological or anatomical
changes in the organism.
Defence Counsel Braude has spoken of how Yagoda explained
the idea of death from disease to the investigating authorities.
I must say that one cannot read these words in the formulation
used by Yagoda himself to describe it without shuddering.
It is very simple, says Yagoda. A person falls i 11, and everybody
becomes accustomed to his being sick. The doctor can facilitate his
recovery, but the physician can also facilitate his death. This is
the gist of the idea. "And all the rest," adds Yagoda, "is a matter
of technique." According to Yagoda, when he told this to the old
man Levin, the latter was stupefied.
There are many, very many cruel methods of ki 1li ng. But I must
· say that not a single one of these methods is so heartrending, so
nerve-racking as the method described in the present case, even
though the individual does not die in a ravine with a broken head,
but at home in his bed, surrounded by the solicitude of all. No
.other method of killing can arouse such public indignation as this
one.
It is an insult to all the ethical .principles of the doctor, who
even on the battlefield must render aid to the enemy. This method
kills the confidence of patients in physicians.
That is why it shocks public opinion so. It is so horrible that it
leaves a sort of depressed feeling in the mind when you learn of it.
The question arises, how could doctors each of whom has forty
years of medical practice to his credit, and who have grown grey in
their profession, resort to such a method of murder?
Comrades judges, every profession undoubtedly gives rise to
definite instincts, as for instance the profession of Defence Counsel
gives rise to an instinct of defence; the same is true of physicians.
To resort to such a method of ki 1li ng, one must uproot this instinct,
ki 11 oneself as a doctor and then undertake the murder of a human
709

being: How could they commit such a crime? This is a question
which cannot but agitate people, a question which everybody is
raising, a question which perhaps prevents many people from sleeping peacefully. And it is our task to explain this difficult problem.
An explanation easily arises in the sense that perhaps it
was assisted by personal sentiments, or anti-Soviet sentiments.
I think that is not the explanation, and I shall take the liberty of
saying why. Had Pletnev's anti-Soviet sentiments been a sufficient
stimulus for him to resort to such a crime, Levin would not have
needed the assistance of Yagoda, who had to exert pressure on
Pletnev before he resorted to such a crime. It would have been sufficient for Levin alone to have said the word and Pletnev would
readily have agreed.
But what do we see? We see the opposite. Levin told Kazakov,
Levin told Pletnev, but before the meeting with Yagoda neither
the one nor the other had committed any wrecking. More than that,
on November 6, Kazakov was with Menzhinsky; at that time
Menzhinsky had moved to Moscow, to his residence in Meshchanskaya Street-and when Kazakov saw that the air was heavy,
polluted, onei n which the very sick Comrade Menzhinskyfound difficulty in breathing, he gave instructions for all the rooms to be
aired, for Menzhi nsky to be brought onto the balcony. And that day
h~ went to Yagoda who met him with the words: "Why are you
·
fiddling about, why don't you act?"
What is the significance of the very summons to Pletnev and
Kazakov to go to Yagoda? It signified that Levin did not count
on being able by a mere talk, or by playing on Kazakov's base
feelings and Pletnev's anti-Soviet sentiments, to spur them on to
monstrous crimes. And this is understandable, because before
undertaking this crime both the one and the other had to change
his nature and uproot the instinct that had arisen as a result of
forty years of meaical activity.
That also was not enough. Yagoda attempted to draw Pletnev
into this crime by playing on his ariti-Soviet sentiments. He spoke
of the unification ofall anti-Soviet forces, asserting that he, Yagoda,
would help them in their counter-revolutionary action. But he himself did not hope that his assertions would produce favourable results, that was why he demanded to be given compromising material affecting Pletnev. But even when Pletnev saw the compromising material that had been gathered against him by Yagoda he still
did not agree.
Then Yagoda resorted to the most effective means; he threatened, and said: "I shall not stop at the most extreme measures to
comp~! you to serv~ me.". Read the following in Yagoda's testimony
of this conversation with Kazakov: "Why are you fiddling
about? Why do you do things on your own account which you
710

should not do?" When Kazakov began to justify himself, says
Yagoda, "l threatened him, I hurled a volley of threats at him,
and he agreed."
Thus that old man Levin, was right when he said: "Fear of
threats, fear of Yagoda, spurred me on to this crime." And he was
right not only as regards himself, but also as regards his fellow
accused, Pletnev and Kazakov.
Allow me to dwell on this moment. It was the most terrible
moment in their lives, it was more terrible than the trial and the
·
sentence. For that reason allow me to dwell upon it.
Comrades judges, blackmailing by threats of death is no joke.
It breaks down not only men of flaccid old age but sometimes even
strong, powerful, healthy young men. In 1880 at the trial of the
"Sixteen" young Okladsky said in his last plea: "I do not ask
the Court for clemency. Any clemency whatsoever would be humiliation to me." But in a few months' time he became a traitor.
What took place in this period? Merely aninterviewwith Sudeykin,
who said to him: "Death or treachery." And he chose the second.
Blackmailing by threats of death is no joke. But how else could
both Pletnev and Kazakov take Yagoda 's threat? How else could
Yagoda 's threats be taken ·by Pletnev, to whom Yagoda stated:
"I shall not stop at the most extreme measures both in relation
to yourself and in relation to your family, to compel you to serve
me." How else could Yagoda 's threats be taken by Kazakov, to
whom Levin said when blessing him as he was about to see Yagoda:
"You must understand that this man will stop at nothing, this
man forgets nothing." And was Levin not right? Did the law keep
Yagoda back from committing monstrous crimes? Did conscience
keep Yagoda back from engaging in unheard of infamy? Did reason
hold him back from committing desperate acts? What else could
have held him back? The lack of opportunities? But you know the
degree of authority with which Yagoda was invested. What
could have prevented him from achieving his nefarious aims? The
lack of will power? Weak nerves? Who can believe this!
What tenacity one must possess, what craftiness one must
possess to enable one, while occupying such a responsible post,
being in the public eye, and having as his main task the struggle
to preserve and protect the Socialist state over a number of years,
to carry on work dai Jy to bring about the defeat of the state and to
gcr unpunished!
.
.
.
In the last analysis, both Yagoda and .his accomp!1ces r:i1scalculated. They did not understand one thing, the chief thing. If
there are dozens of unscrupulous people sapping the foundati~ns
of the Soviet Union, there are millions of honest people protecting
it by their vigilance and devotion.
.
.
That is why the ruin they were preparing for the Soviet Umon
711

and at the same time for each one of us descended on their own
heads. He who sows the wind reaps the whirlwind.
But it is not they who are important to me just now. What is
important to me is the behaviour of Pletnev and Kazakov at that
ill-fated moment when they were face to face with Yagoda in his
office. The question was put to them bluntly. They understood
quite well that the menace facing them was a real one. What is
more, both Kazakov and Pletnev understood perfectly well that
Yagoda could not but carry out his threats. This was dictated by
the position of Yagoda himself. After Yagoda .had spoken of t~e
conspiracy, after Yagoda had stated that he himself was a participant in the conspiracy, after he had made the proposition to them
to commit this monstrous crime, he could not but carry out his
threats.
In what way could he safeguard himself against Kazakov and
Pletnev as witnesses of his conversation with them?
There were two ways: either a tall costs to win them as accomplices
in the crime, and then they would be silent, or else to compel them
to be silent, even at the price of destroying them. It is impossible
to invent any third way. These were the conditions under which the
question was raised before Pletnev and Kazakov.
Comrades judges, under these conditions they had to give a reply
without delay. There was no way for them to escape. There was
no time to think the matter over. Here was a moment when the
fate of a man was being decided. And at that moment Yagoda was
eyeing them with his evil, piercing glance. I can imagine that this
fatal, piercing glance crushed their consciousness, paralysed their
will, killed their feelings. Reason, when shaken, Comrades judges,
often does not bear up-under its own weight and goes mad, and a
free man is broken.
Perhaps I do not possess the necessary words capable of enabling you to feel the whole horror of the moment through which
Pletnev and Kazakov passed. If I had had these words at my
command, I would not be in the least uneasy as to their lives.
The horrible thing is frequently not in what an individual does
but what he becomes afterwards. What did they become after this
moment of their fall? Before they became the murderers of others
they morally murdered themselves. This was a moment which killed
them themselves. They made their conscience, the conscience of
physicians, black as the conscience of a tyrant. They bespattered
the name of professor with the filth of unbelievable crimes, they cast
shame on the halo surrounding men of science, they tramp led upon the
name of man. Only a great psychologist can describe such moments.
All the rest is the consequence of this moment. The moment
Yagoda broke them, the moment they gave their consent, they
became moral corpses, they killed themselves. And you, Comrades

712

judges, know who it was that spurred them on first to moral
suicide and then to the murder of others.
That is why I request clemency for them. That is why the Counsel for Defence asks that they not be placed on the same level in
punishment as those who were their murderers.
There is yet another argument for the defence. When speaking
here of participation in crimes, the Procurator theoretically cor:ectly dev:eioped the thoug~t that a i:iember of an organization
1s responsible for all the crimes committed by that organization.
But as a practical man, as the State Prosecutor, he told you, Comrades judges, that in each specific case one must judge how closely
one or another criminal was implicated in the commission of the
crime. This gave him grounds for departing from the severe demand
of punishment in relation to the accused Rakovsky and Bessonov.
According to this standard, have Pletnev and Kazakov less
grounds for clemency? They were drawn into the chain of these
great crimes later. Others of the accused are guilty of crimes extending from the year 1918 to the present time. My clients did not
know of this, were not privy to this.
We believe, Comrades judges, that you will take these arguments of the defence into account, and that despite the series of
ghastly and unparalleled monstrous crimes committed by Pletnev,
.Kazakov and Levin you will find it possible to spare their lives.
And if they are destined to live, after your sentence, then let them
remember the words of a certain public figure of the Great French
Revolution who said: "Mercy can also be insulted if it is given
to the unworthy." Their task will be to use the rest of their lives
to prove that they were worthy of the mercy extended to them
by you. They have admitted their guilt. They have stated: "\Ve
repent.'' And I believe them, Comrades judges. Woe wears no mask.
When Pletnev wrote in his statemenno Comrade Yezbov that
after confessing he felt relief, when Kazakov said the same thing,
they were not being hypocritical. In their position, their conscience, the trial, the punishment and the mental suffering are all
that can reconcile them to themselves, at least to some extent. At
times distress is the only form of truth, and they well understand it.
I have said that the task before them, if they are destined to
live, is to prove that they are worthy of mercy. How can they do
this? They must forget themselves, and give everything they possess-knowledge, experience, practice, theory-to the fatherland
that they betrayed. And they do have something to give. Forty
years of Pletnev's medical, clinical, professorial, and pedagogical
activities have given him great scientific treasure. He is capable of
work, even while under detention he has been engaged on his scientific works. Kazakov has a medical, chemical and agronomical
713

education. Thirty years of research work have undoubtedly enriched
Kazakov and he must pass on this wealth to others.
They must aive themselves to their fatherland without stint.
This is the denfand made on them by their defence if they are
fated to live. And to you, Comrades judges, I address only one
appeal-spare them their lives.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for 20 minutes .

•

*

•

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Bessonov, inasmuch as you have declined Counsel, you are
entitled to make a speech in your defence, or perhaps you wish to
combine your speech in defence with your last plea?
BESSONOV: Yes.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Grinko?
GRINKO: I waive the speech in defence, I shall combine it
with my last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Chernov?
CHERNOV: I waive the speech in defence. I shall say everything in my last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Ivanov?
IVANOV: I waive it. I sJ:iall defend myself in my last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Krestinsky, do you wish to
avail yourself of your right to a speech in defence?
KRESTINSKY: No, only my last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zubarev?
ZUBAREV: I waive the speech in defence.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rykov?
RYKOV: I sha II only make a last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Sharangovich?
SHARANGOVICH: I do not intend to defend myself, therefore
I waive the speech in defence, I shall only speak in the last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Khodjayev?
KHODJAYEV: I also waive it.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zelensky?
ZELENSKY: I waive it.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused lkramov, do you wish to avail
yourself of your right to a speech in defence?
IKRAMOV: I waive it.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rakovsky?
RAKOVSKY: I waive the speech in defence, I shall only avai i
myself of my last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rosengoltz, do you wish to avail
yourself of your right to a speech in defence?
714

ROSENGOLTZ: No, I shall avail myself only of the last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bukharin?
BUKHARIN: l waive a special speech in defence, but shall
combine defence on certain points of the accusation with my last
plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Bulanov?
BULANOV: I shall only avail myself of the last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Yagoda?
YAGODA: Only the last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Kryuchkov?
KRYUCHKOV: Only the last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Maximov-Dikovsky?
MAXIMOV: I shall avail myself of the last plea.
THE PRESIDENT: In that case we shall pass on to the last
pleas. Accused Bessonov, you have your last plea.
BESSONOV: Citizens judges, together with the other accused
I answer here before the proletarian Court for the very grave crimes
against the state, committed by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and by myself personally as one who actively participated in
it. Of these crimes the most terrible, tremendous, is the treason to
the fatherland of which I am guilty. I was an intermediary in and
participant of the criminal negotiations between the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites"andfascistcirclesin Germany. In these negotiations
there culminated the criminal collaboration begun long ago between the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and the fascist agency
abroad, a collaboration designed to undermine the military and
economic power of the U. S. S. R., to hasten a fascist attack on the
land of victorious Socialism.
·
In these negotiations the war incendiaries from both sides elaborated a monstrous line for the defeat of the U.S.S.R., outlined a plan of huge territorial concessions to the enemy.
The stern hand of proletarian justice was timely in uncovering
the ghastly ulcers of treason and treachery, in exposing the monstrous plot and placing its participants, including myself, before
the relentless responsibility of Soviet law.
I was also an intermediary and participant in the criminal
connections between the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and
the whiteguard emigre section of the so-called "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia.,, Deprived of all support whatsoever within the
country, spurred on by their fascist masters, the leaders of the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" strove to gather under their wing
all the agents of fascism within the U.S.S.R., including the
so-called "Trudovaya Krestyanskaya Partia." Proletarian justice
dealt a crushing blow to this miserable effort, too.
Not all the crimes of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,"
of which I personally am also guilty, such as the execution of
715

the heinous design to destroy the great writer of the working class,
the treacherous killing of several outstanding figures of the Soviet
country could be prevented by justice. But apart from the crimes
spoken of in the Indictment and in the speech of Citizen the
State Prosecutor, I must admit yet another crime against proletarian justice, which has not been spoken of at the trial.
In the year that has passed si nee I was arrested, I have already on
one occasion faced a proletarian Court, and hid from it the facts of
my anti-Soviet activity of which I am accused at the present trial.
I was arrested on February 28, last year. The investigation
on my first case lasted five and a half months. Extensive material
was collected by the organs of the People's Commissariat of
Internal Affairs, a large number of witnesses was examined, several confrontations took place, references were collected with
regard to me and my connections from aII places where I had
worked. Everything was checked up. A year has gone by and
what then?
Making use of the fact that the testimony given about me by
individuals not participating in the present trial did not
completely reflect the real state of affairs, I stubbornly denied the
main charges preferred against me, namely, that I belonged to an
illegal anti-Soviet organization.
On August 13, last year, I faced the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court which was composed of almost the same
people as in the present trial, but sat in camera, and applied the
law of December I, 1934. The Military Collegium subjected all
the accusations made against me to a careful examination. I was
enabled to give an extensive explanation on all the questions put
to me. However, in Court as well, I continued the same tactics
of disavowal that I had masteredat the investigation. After a
thorough investigation of the case, the .Military Collegium did
not consider it possible either to acquit me or to pass sentence on
me, and sent my case for further examination.
An additional four and a half months passed by. During that
time the organs of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs discovered several threads capable of leading to the discovery
of my illegal anti-Soviet activity. And it was only at the end of
last year that there was discovered for the first time the thread
that led from Krestinsky to me. On October 28, last year, exactly
ten months after my arrest, I was shown that part of Krestinsky's
testimony which exposed me as the liaison man between the '·bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites''and abroad and Trotsky. Since Krestinsky, after Pyatakov, was the only person who knew everything
about my anti-Soviet activity, I no longer had the energy and did
not attempt to maintain my former position of disavowal, I only
716

asked for a few days in which to think things over, and these were
granted to me. I was faced with the choice: either to continue my
former tactics of disavowal with immeasurably smaller chances of
success, in view of the fact that the investigating authorities possessed far greater materials about my anti-Soviet activity and were
on the unerringly correct road, or else, to make a clean breast of
everything that I knew to the investigation authorities.
Only on December 30 of last year did I state to the investigating aut~o~ities that I was breaking resolutely and utterly
with my criminal past, and that I would begin to givetestimony
frankly and thoroughly. I did not prevaricate nor did I deny things.
The break with the criminal past-and I very clearly understood
this-could only assume one form, the form of complete, frank
detailed testimony. I testified absolutely everything I knew both
of the facts that were wholly or partly known to the investigating
authorities, and of facts that were not known to the investigating
authorities. I mention this circumstance not because I wish to
see in it any circumstance mitigating my guilt, but only in
order by this touch to complete the picture of the ten months of
fruitless struggle against proletarian justice, a struggle that has
the sad advantage of being outstandingly long even at the
present tria I.
Citizens judges, lofty words are out of place and not very
convincing on the Ii ps of a person accused, as I am, of very grave
crimes against the State. It is late to beat one's breast, and-to
repeat the words of Citizen the State Prosecutor-to unmask one's
own crimes. But there is one circumstance on which I cannot but
touch. Not because I see in it the mitigation of my tremendous
guilt, but because it alone has given me the strength to avail myself of the right of accused to make a last plea. My criminal activity took place in the conditions of work carried on abroad. My
lengthy detachment from Soviet realities also explains to a considerable degree the fact that I took the criminal path. The more than
six years of my sojourn in a directly capitalist environment had
a fatal effect on my political behaviour.
But there is another side to this fact of my stay abroad to
which I would like to devote a couple of words. Had I been a consistent betrayer of my country, nothing, it would appear, would
have prevented me remaining on the other side of the border,
particularly after the trial of January, 1937, when Pyatakov-the
immediate leader of my criminal work, about whose possible
testimony against me I could build the most gloomy conjectures
was exposed and sentenced, and yet, at the first call in February
I 937, I appeared in Moscow to answer before the fatheriai:d.
Now it is this, at first glance, inexplicable inconsistency, which
drove me to my country, while criminal logic apparently should

717

have dictated the opposite to me, that gives me the right to say
now: whatever the sentence of the proletarian Court, it will be the
sentence of my country, and I shall accept it with resignation.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Grinko, you may avail yourself
of your last plea.
GRINKO: I am making my last plea not in order to defend
myself before the Supreme Court. I have nothing to say in my
defence. Nor shall I make use of this plea in order to ask for a
mitigation of the sentence. I have no right to a mitigation of the
sentence. I am wholly and completely in agreement with the qualification and political estimation, both of our crimes in general
and of my crimes in particular, as given in the speech of the
Procurator of the U.S.S.R. Yes, that is how things stand.
I face the Supreme Court as a traitor to the country, as an
active participant of the plot of the Rights and Trotskyites against
Socialism victorious in the U.S.S.R., as an ally and agent of capitalism in its mortal struggle against Socialism, as an offender
against the state who had set his hand to the preparation of the
provocation of war, of the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R. for
the benefit of fascism, who had set his hand to the preparation of
the murder of the best people of our country and to the violent
overthrow of the Socialist state and public order in the U.S.S.R.
There is nothing to be added to this Ii st of crimes. 1\1a ny facts
and criminal deeds of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" became known to me, as apparently to several others of the accused,
for the first time in the Court itself. But I must say to you outright
that the most monstrous of these crimes-the monstrous murders
of the best people of our country as outlined by Yagoda, facts that
I was unaware of before-have not surprised me, for in them I have
beheld the countenance and handiwork of the plot of Rights and
Trotskyites; in them I have beheld the line of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites" and its leaders. Our former leaders would have
done better had they not made any attempt at all in Court to mitigate in any way whatsoever their direct responsibility for all
these deeds. None of us can or should avoid this responsibility.
Like some others of the accused, I face the Court as a direct
agent and spy of fascist powers and their intelligence services,
as a direct ally of fascism in its struggle against the U.S.S.R.
But it was not fascism that made me such. Fascism gathered
for itself the ready fruits of the many years of struggle by the Trotskyites and the Rights against the Party and the Soviet power.
It is to Trotsky and Bukharin that I am obliged for the "ideology,,,
pardon the expression, and the school of monstrous double-dealing
led us all to outright fascism.
I face the Court as a Ukrainian bourgeois nationalist and at the
same time as a participant in the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
718

This is no chance combination. The hunting after bourgeois nationalists and the political corruption of unstable political elements
in the national republics are old-established stubbornly conducted
tactics of the Trotskyites and the Rights.
It was along the criminal treasonable path that the Ukrainian national-fascist organizations came to join the forces of the
counter-revolution united in the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
This Ukrainian national-fascist organization operated at one and
the same time both on the instructions of the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites" and on the instructions of the fascist intelligence
services.
My very grave crimes, as a participant in the plot of Rights
and Trots,kyites are to a tremendous degree aggravated by the
following circumstances.
Firstly, as one of the organizers of the Ukrainian nationalfascist organization, I operated particularly in the Ukraine, that
is to say, at the main gates through which German fascism is
preparing its blow against the U.S.S.R.
At the orders of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and of
the German intelligence service, the Ukrainian national-fascist
organization, including myself, conducted a tremendous amount
of work to undermine the western border of the U.S.S.R. And
it seems to me that it is only the absence of the desire to tell the
complete truth to the Court that explains the fact that while both
Rykov and Bukharin admit personal contacts with me, as a participant of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" they deny
contact through me with the Ukrainian national-fascist organization which was an important card in the anti-Soviet struggle
of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
L-"This Ukrainian national-fascist organization-Lyubchenko,
Poraiko and others-completes the last link in the long chain of
criminal deeds committed against the Ukrainian people, by various
factions of Ukrainian bourgeois-nationalism from the very beginning of the revolution.
The Procurator of the U.S.S.R. was right when he said that
under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party and the Soviet government, the Ukrainian people, advancing along the road of the
national policy of Lenin and Stalin, have been raised to such a high
level as never before in all its previous history. The Bolshevik
Party and Soviet power have created the Ukrainian state, they
have made the Ukraine a very rich industrial and collective
farming country, they have raised Ukrainian national culture to an unprecedented high level. And this Ukrainian national
fascist organization, which it is my sad lot to represent before the
Court, was, by resorting to bogus slogans of national "independence,"
719

leading the Ukrainian people to the yoke of German fascists
and Polish gentry.
The second circumstance which makes my guilt, as a participant in the plot of ~ights and Trotskyites, more grave is that
for over two years I knew of the conspiracy in the Red Army,
I was personally connected with a number of the outstanding
military conspirators who were undermining the defensive power
of the U.S.S.R. and preparing its defeat. I knew and was connected, with people both in the Ukrainian organization as well
as in the Red Army, who were preparing to do what was spoken
of at this trial, to open the front to the enemy.
The third circumstance which adds to the gravity of my guilt
before the peoples of the U.S.S.R. is that in the course of several
months I knew not only of the general terrorist Ii ne of the centre
of Rights and Trotskyites, but I also knew about the fact that
two terrorist groups, day after day, kept trailing Stalin and
Yezhov, with the aim of assassinating them. In other words,
I raised my hand against Stalin, who is honoured by the working people of the entire world as the genius of liberated humanity, and against Yezhov, who personifies the great determination
of the Party to crush the enemies of the U.S.S.R.
Finally, my guilt is made more grave by the high station
which I occupied, by my high post and by the confidence shown
in me by the Central Committee and Stalin.
The Party raised me from the petty-bourgeois mire,
it placed me in a high post in the government, a high station,
entrusted me with State secrets and with control over the
State finances of the U.S.S.R. I betrayed these secrets. I permitted, I collaborated in the utilization of State funds, public
funds of the U.S.S.R. to finance an unparalleled conspiracy
against the peoples of the U.S.S.R.
I recall one episode of my life. In I 933, when the Ukrainian
nationalist organization was destroyed and several of my closest pals were arrested, I was seriously compromised by my personal contact with them. My Party organization recoiled from me.
I was alone and isolated. And I wrote a personal letter to
Stalin about this. On the very same day, on the very same evening I received over the telephone from the leadership of the Central
Committee a very warm message of comradely encouragement and
support which put me at ease. And within a few months I was
shown such confidence as is the dream of every Party member.
I was elected to the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.
And to all of this I replied by betrayal, by darkest betrayal,
of the Party, the fatherland and Stalin.
And it is in conditions like these, members of the Supreme
Court, that I must tell you of my remorse. I very well understand
720

with what scorn and contempt every Soviet person will meet these
words of repentance coming as they do from me. Neverthelessr
I must say this because it corresponds to the truth, because there is
no one else to whom I can address these words. In the situation in
which I found myself there was only one way open to me to prove
by my deeds that I have repented, and that was to disclose all the
facts of the conspiracy and all the participants in the conspiracy
known to me to the investigating authorities and the Court. I have
done this to the end. In my testimony I did not spare myself, did
not spare any of my confederates. I named all the facts and all
the plotters known to me. I must confess that I did not do this at once.
But was it possible for me at one blow to overcome the inertia of
many years of stubborn and dangerous underground struggle against
the Soviet government, to suppress the feeling of friendship for
accomplices, to destroy the ulcer of double-dealing, to suppress
the feeling of shame? In a word, could I at once lay bare my soul,
the soul of a traitor, the like of which the world has never seen?
But I have done this to the very end and the Court has had the
possibility of verifying this.
In my situation there is still another form in which to express
repentance. Unfortunately this is a form which cannot directly be
checked by the Court but nonetheless this form does not cease
to exist because of this. I refer to my inner feeling of satisfaction.
I make bold to speak of my happiness at the fact that our villainous conspiracy has been discovered and that the unexampled
calamities, which we were preparing and partially carried out
against the U.S.S.R., have been averted. The People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, given new vitality, wiped out the plot
of Rights and Trotskyites in their last lair. I am glad of this.
I wi 11 accept the most severe verdict-the supreme penaltyas deserved. I have only one wish: I wish to live through my
last days or hours, no matter how few they may be, I. wish to live
through and die not as an enemy taken prisoner by the Soviet
government, but as a citizen of the U.S.S.R. who has
committed the gravest treachery to the fatherland, whom the
fatherland has severely punished for this, but who repented.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Chernov, you may make your
last plea.
CHERNOV: Citizens judges, I am taking advantage of my
right to the accusea's last plea not in order to defend or exculpate
myself. The heinous crimes which I committed against the
great Soviet country can neither be exculpated nor defended.
I am a traitor to the Socialist fatherland. I was selling the interests of the fatherland to fascism, that enemy of theworki ngclass
and of the whole of humanity. I am a spy in the employ of the Ger~

721

man intelligence service, an active member of the counter-revolutionary organization of Rights, an organization of wrecking and diversion. I am an active participant of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," which had for its aim the overthrow of the Socialist
social and state system existing in the U.S.S.R. and the restoration of capitalism, the restoration of the power of the bourgeoisie.
I am an active participant of the bloc which undertook crimes
unprecedented in their monstrosity in order to achieve its aimsthe restoration of capitalism, and utilized the whole arsenal of
banditry for this purpose.
The crimes which I committed, I repeat, can be neither defended nor exculpated. They merit the most severe punishment.
How could it come about that I, in whom the Party placed
the greatest confidence, could betray the Party and fatherland~
and become a spy in the employ of the German intelligence
service and a member of a counter-revolutionary organization?
As I have already testified in Court, I had been a Menshevik in
the course of a long period, and not a rank and file member of the
Menshevik Party but the leader of one of its organizations, the
Ivanovo-Voznesensk organization. I possessed sufficient education
and political understanding to accept Menshevism conscientiously
and fight for its program of the defence of capitalism.
I joined the Communist Party at a time when the forces of
counter-revolution in the country were already smashed and when
the working class under the leadership of the Bolsheviks emerged
victorious from the civil war.
The time of my entry into the Communist Party coincides
with the beginning of the New Economic Policy. I did not appraise
this policy in the way it was accepted by real Bolsheviks, but in my
own, Menshevik way. Therefore, when the Party proceeded from
its policy of limiting the kulaks and the capitalist elements in the
cities towards the policy of an offensive and routing of them, my
Menshevik soul could not reconcile itself to such a policy and'
I began to look around, in the anti-Soviet groups and parties, for
people whose views corresponded to my Menshevism and whose·
practical aims implied the struggle for the overthrow of the Soviet
government and the restoration of capitalism.
I found people with.these views in the counter-revolutionary·
organization of the Rights. The views and practical aims of this.
organization fully and completely coincided with my own Menshevik views. In those days of 1928 I was yet a person of little i mportance in the Party. In saying this I have not the slightest desire
to minimize my guilt or belittle my crimes. My crimes are boundless and monstrous. People like Rykov, Bukharin and Tomsky
st~d at the head of the counter-revolutionary organization of the
Rights, and the fact that they arrived at the aim of overthrowingthe SoViet government and restoring capitalism, that is to say
722

they arrived at Menshevism, strengthened me in my Menshevik
stand. This played a definite role in my joining the counterrevolutionary organization of the Rights.
Dan played an important role in my entering upon the path
of a German spy. In his meetings with me Dan used to argue the
necessity for the Rights to struggle against the Soviet power
and to render assistance to capitalist states in the latter's
struggle for the common aim, that is, for the overthrow of Soviet
power. The fact that Dan himself, as I became convinced later,
was an agent of the German intelligence service, was of great
importance . in my consenting to become a German spy. In
enumerating the reasons which led me to espionage, I must
also add my moral instability, namely, excessive drinking.
Upon my return to the Soviet Union from Germany it was
my duty, not only as a member of the Party but as a citizen of
the Soviet Union, to tell of the criminal contact which I had
established with the German intelligence service. In doing so
I would have reinstated myself in the ranks of honest citizens.
I did not do this. I preferred to remain a traitor to the fatherland.
During 1929 through Paul Scheffer and in the subsequent period
up to my arrest, through Raivid, I served the German intelligence service and helped it in its struggle for the dismemberment
of the Soviet Union and for the defeat of the U.S.S.R. in war.
The commissions I received from the Germani ntelli gence service;
namely, to perform acts of wrecking and diversion coincided
with the instructions which I received through Rykov from the
centre of my counter-revolutionary organization of Rights.
Essentially speaking there was no difference between the two.
Both of them acted in one and the same direction, namely, striving
to undermine the economic might and defence capacity of the
Soviet Union and in this way to secure the latter's defeat in war,
the overthrow of Soviet power and the restoration of capitalism.
This coincidence in the aims and practical instructions of
the German intelligence service and of the centre of the Rights
served as an extra inducement for me to continue espionage
work and organize wrecking and acts of diversion.
In the course of my criminal activities, as an active participant of the counter-revolutionary organization of Rights and
as a German spy, I carried out wrecking and diversion actions
of a monstrous character and on a large scale. I gave detailed
testimony on this at the preliminary investigation and spoke
of it in Court.
The Party had shown me the greatest confidence by placing
me at the head of the People's Commissariat of Agriculture. But
I used this confidence against the Party, I used it against the
fatherland. It was not the directions of the Party, aimed at con46*

723

solidating the collective farming system, fostering the might of
the collective farms and enhancing the welI-being of the collective farmers, that I carried out; I carried out the directions of the
centre of the counter-revolutionary organization of Rights and
of the German intelligence service, tending to destroy the
collective farming system, to undermine the collective farms.
Rykov tried to deny here that he gave me instructions to organize wrecking activities in agriculture. I recall this not in
order to lessen my guilt or shift the blame onto someone else.
I do this with the sole purpose of establishing the truth.
Rykov wishes to depict matters as though he supplied only
"ideological" advice on wrecking activities but took no part
in the organization of these activities. This is not true. Or, to
be more precise, this is only half of the truth, and a half truth is
already a lie. On behalf of the centre of Rights, Rykov, side
by side with the German intelligence service, directed all my
activities in wrecking and diversion in agriculture.
On the very first day of my arrest, at the very first interrogation, I gave sincere and truthful testimony to the investigation
authorities regarding my criminal activities as an active participant of the counter-revolutionary organization and as a German
spy.
I also gave testimony to the investigation authorities regarding
the people with whom I was connected in my counter-revolutionary and espionage work. I equally sincerely and truthf.ully testified in Court.
What prompted me to give truthful testimony immediately
after my arrest?
The smashing of the counter-revolutionary organization of
Rights began in 1937. The ringleaders of the organization, Rykov,
Bukharin and others, were arrested, the cou11ter-revolutionary
organization of the Rights in the People's Commissariat of Agriculture was routed. Raivid, the above-mentioned resident agent
of the German intelligence service, was arrested in the summer
of 1917. All of this made me ponder over the question of whether
the continuation of the struggle would be of any use. The reply
could be only in the negative. The might of the Soviet state is
invincible!
What was our counter-revolutionary organization? It was a
gang of frenzied bureaucratic officials, it had no roots in the
people. Agreements with the fascist governments formed its basis.
The Soviet people, despite all our machinations, the machinations of counter-revolutionaries, have built Socialism and have
achieved an unprecedented victory. The realization of this might
of the Soviet power and Soviet state led me to down arms immediately after my arrest and give sincere and truthful testimony.
My crimes ...are great.._and monstrous. Any punishmen( ..which
724

the Court deems necessary to mete out to me would be inadequate as against these crimes.
And nevertheless I make bold to plead to the Court and ask
that it spare my life.
Should the Court find it possible to do so and should my life
be spared, I will devote all my strength to the service of the
great Soviet people.
I cannot expiate my crimes-they are too great. By my honest
work in the future I shall try to make up if even for a very
small particle of these terrible crimes against the fatherland,
against the great Soviet country.
THE PRESIDENT: The Court is adjourned till 11 a.m.
[Signed]

PRESIDENT:

V. ULRICH

Army Military Juris!!
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U .S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER
Military Jurist First Rank

725

MORNING SESSION, MARCH 12, 1938
COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
The accused Ivanov may make his last plea.
IVANOV: Citizens judges, in my last plea I wish to tell the
Court that I have fully and sincerely revealed the history of my
criminal struggle against the Party and the Soviet power, against
the Soviet people. I have hidden nothing, I have concealed nothing, either as regards my counter-revolutionary treasonable
activities, or as regards the activities of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites," of which I was an active member.
I waived my speech for the defence because I fully admit
and painfully realize my profound guilt before the Soviet land,
and have nothing to say in my defence.
The only thing that supported me in these dark days, the days
of my public disgrace, was the thought that I had at last broken
with that accursed and criminal past which bound me, that I had
broken once and for all and had left it behind me.
When I was drawn into this criminal business of provocation,
I was just a raw lad, without any experience in life. I did not stand
the first test; I acted like a coward, took the first step along the
path of treachery, and then slii:wect down the inclined plane and
was sucked into the quagmire of treachery. And treachery has its
own logic. I experienced its full power after the October Revolution.
It would be false and a superfluous exaggeration if I were to say
that I felt no sympathy at all for the October Revolution, that
I did not accept it. The power of the proletarian party, the power
of the Revolution is such that a man whose status in life is close
to the working class-as I was-feels its influence even while
fulfilling such a role as I was before the victory of the
working class. In the period of the October Revolution I experienced both joy and fear: joy, together with the victorious masses, and fear at the menace of exposure. I must say that even
then I did not have the courage to come and openly confess
my treachery. And the fact that I did not do so was decisive,
as my whole subsequent history shows. As time went on I came
more and more to resemble a man who had been flung into the
water with a weight tied to his feet, a man who passionately
726

.desires to reach.the. shore, while the weight steadily drags him
to the bottom. And this bottom was the "Left Communists,"
.and later my enlistment into the ranks of the organization
-0f the Rights by Bukharin.
I believed that the menace of exposure of my provocateur
.activities would be removed only if the power of capitalism were
restored. This constantly impelled me to seek for hostile forces
·-Of restoration, so that I might join them. I looked for people
who desired what I did, who desired a bourgeois system. I sought
for these people, and I found them in the organization of the
Rights. It is therefore clear that I sympathized with all the actions
and activities of the Rights, and of Bukharin, with whom I
maintained anti-Soviet connections as the leader of the "Left
..Communists." It required no effort at all in 1928 to enlist me
into the organization of the Rights. And then the whole subse.quent development of my anti-Soviet activities was influenced
by Bukharin, who led me step by step down the ladder of crime.
On Bukharin's instructions, I endeavoured in 19'28 to organize
a kulak insurrectionary "Vendee" in the North Caacasus. In
1932, again on his instructions, I associated myself with an
uprising for the overthrow of the Soviet power in the North Cau~
-casus, where I was working at that time. rn 1934 Bukharin spoke to
me of the need for defeat in war, of the necessity to base our plans
·.On the aggressive fascist countries, on Germany and japan in
the first place. Accordingly, a group of Rights in the Northern Ter·ritory began to engage under my guidance in terrorist, diversive
and espionage activities. After all this, it was strange to hear
:Bukharin declare here that he was a "pure theoretician" who
concerned himself only about problematics and "ideology.,, Citizens judges, the fact that I have laid down my arms and
·have repented would not be worth a brass farthing if in my
last plea I did not raise my voice against this blatant untruth..
According to Bukharin, the organization of the Rights comprised,
-0n one hand, s~called pure theoreticians, leaders, who were not
'responsible for the specific crimes and who occupied the~elves
with the delicate and "noble" business of ideology; and, on the
·other hand, dirty practical men, who did all the damage, who
were responsible for everything, who placed before Bukharin
·specific questions of terrorism, wrecking, diversion and espionage,
while he, Bukharin, only listened and remained silent
Only in trials of counter-revolutionaries is such a thing pos-sible, that the leaders lay the whole blame on the practical executors, and try to escape it themselves. Yes, I have committed
m'onstrous crimes, and I am answering for them. But I committed
-them jointly with Bukharin, and we must answer for them jointly.
And what ideology, indeed, could there be here? Hatred for the
727

S<>viet power and the Party, calumny against its leaders-that
was the whole of our ideology. And just because I, as an active
participator, bear responsibility not only for my own activities
but also for the activities of the whole organization of the Rights~
I must firmly and clearly declare, Citizens judges, that Bukharin
has not told everything here, that he has concealed many of the
threads and connections, and has tried to evade responsibility
for his grave crime. Bukharin was not our ideologist. We conspirators needed no ideologists. Bukharin was the organizer of the
Right conspirators; he selected people and placed them, gave
them instructions and demanded account of them. Bukharin
was the initiator of the practice of terrorism, wrecking and diversion, and of the whole system of defeatist measures. He was the
principal leader of the espionage activities, and he it was who
held in his hands the most important connections with the intelligence services of the fascist countries.
As such, and only as such, do I know him. That is what I took
him to be; and, moreover, that is what all the other members of the
organization took him to be. Bukharin directed the organization
of the Rights by the same means and methods as Trotsky directed
the whole "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites. ''
Why has not Bukharin told the whole truth? This question
arises in my mind, and cannot but arise in my mind, when we
are being called upon to answer before the people for our heinous
crimes, crimes which are without precedent in the history of the
revolutionary working class movement. The reason, I think, why
Bukharin has not told the whole truth here is because throughout
the whole period of the revolution he has fought the revolution
and to this day has remained its enemy, and because he wants
to preserve those remnants of the hostile forces which are stm
lurking in their dens.
I, as a man who, although he did not belong to the central
nucleus of the leadership of the Rights, nevertheless was an active
conspirator, as a man who knows Bukharin well, consider it my
duty to declare here that after the collapse of our hopes for a kulak
uprising, the only hope that remained to us was the hope for
the defeat of the Soviet Union in war. I was unable in my
testimony to bring out in sufficient relief how profoundly
defeatism had become part of the very bone and marrow of our
organization. The point must be stressed that we, the members
of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, '' became as strongly
possessed by the idea of defeatism as by duplicity; like duplicity,.
defeatism literally became part and parcel of the psychology of
every one of us. Wherever I happened to meet a member of our
-0rganization. the talk would invariably turn to the subject that
war was bound to break out in the near future, and that the defeat
of the Soviet Union, for which we were paving the way, would
728

radically alter our position. I wanted war, I longed for it. I recalJI
that every diplomatic success of the Soviet Union which tended
to postpone war, that every success of the united front in the
struggle against fascism and war, caused despondency and dejection in all of us.
One must lose the last remnants of conscience to deny that
we placed our stake on defeat and on the establishment of a.
fascist dictatorship.
In connection with defeatism, I recall another characteristic
detail, a conversation I had with Bukharin in 1936. Bukharin
asserted that it was essential, by means of a series of diversive
and terrorist blows, to destroy the defence of the country; he
said that the Rights in the Northern Territory were very slack
in mustering insurrectionary cadres. And he added the following: of course we would have to pay for assistance by cessions.
of border territories, you will get nothing for nothing, no help;
but, after all, it is not indispensable that Russia should constitute
one-sixth of the world-she may be one-tenth. That is not the
important thing, Bukharin said, and it is only people wh<>
feared terrible words who cannot understand it.
I am not concealing the truth, I am not sparing myself. Neither
can I avoid telling the truth to spare my accomplices. I was_ a defeatist and a spy, and so was my leader, Bukharin.
In order to give a clear idea of my state of mind by the time
of my arrest I would like to say a few words about the poisonous~
asphyxiating atmosphere that prevailed in our counter-revolutionary underground organization.
We, the members of the underground organization, regardecL
the masses of the toilers with misgivings and rancour. We conspirators hounded honest people, and tried in every way to drag
honest people into our quagmire. We played a game of duplicity. We tried to lure every novice into some wrecking act so as
to get him into our power by the threat of exposure. In recruiting
cadres we widely resorted to various forms of provocation. The
conspirators held these novices firmly in their hands.
As I have already stated in my testimony, there were many
moments when my heart was torn by repentance, and the thought
throbbed insistently in my mind to go and tell about the organization of the Rights. But I did not do so.
It is especially painful for me to stand before the people,
the broad masses, as a betrayer of my country, as a traitor. But
I must say that I have now made a clean breast of my crimes to
the Court. When I begin to analyse my crimes and wish to find
mitigating circumstances, I cannot, amidst my dastardly crimes,
find anything to mitigate them. It was only after my arrest that
I felt relief, that I felt that I was really through with my
dastardly deeds. I felt that only one path now lay before me
729

to the end. I felt that I now stood alone, with the whole people
against me.
I could fight no more. It became clear to me that we had suffered a debacle, that my struggle against the Soviet power was
over, and it became clear to me that it was impossible to continue
the struggle. That is why I told the whole truth at the preliminary
investigation and in Court, without any concealment. I have told
everything to the very end. I am now in a position where burdensome crimes weigh down upon me: treason, treachery, terrorism.
I now feel much easier at heart, because I have completely
.divulged my crimes.
Citizens judges, I now experience a dual feeling with regard
to the sentence. It is hard to go on living when you have been
-through a black and stinking cesspool. When I pondered
whether there was anything to lessen my guilt, whether there
was any ~rime about which I could say that I had not committed
it, I could find nothing.
My crimes included provocation, active participation in
i:he "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, '' treason to the fatherland,
wrecking, diversion and insurrection. It is hard to live, comrades,
with such a record. But on the other hand, I experience the contrary feeling. Citizens Judges, I must say that I shall accept the
most severe sentence, but I find it inexpressibly hard to die when
I have at last cleared myself of this filth, of this abomination.
If I am given the opportunity to prove my loyalty, I shall work
honestly and devotedly for the benefit of the people.
I plead with the Soviet Court to give me this opportunity. I plead
with the Soviet government for mercy.
THE PRESIDENT: The accused Krestinsky may make his
tast plea.
KRESTINSKY: Citizens judges, in this dock I am one of those
who have the longest records of active participation in political
life. I began my revolutionary career as an eighteen-year old
youth, in 1901, and for twenty years, until 1921, that is, until
ihe moment when I, in conjunction with Trotsky, began my
struggle against the Party and the Soviet power, the struggle which
finally led me into the dock, I worked as an honest Bolshevik.
During the preliminary investigation and the Court investigation I did not say a single word about this, I made no reference
to the period of revolutionary struggle in my life, because I considered that in the dock I must answer for my counter-revolutionary actions, and not indulge in repentance.
And only now, in my last plea do I find it possible, before proceeding to recount and severely judge my monstrous crimes, to
<leal briefly with these periods in my life as well, inasmuch as the
purpose of the last plea is to give the Court a complete idea of the
730

criminal, including the time when he had not yet committed
criminal deeds.
The first stage in my revolutionary activities, 1901-06, was
connected with the first revolution of 1905. These years I spent
partly in St. Petersburg, but chiefly in the North-Western Territory. Being one of the active leaders in the territory, I worked in
practically every town of the North-Western Territory, was several times arrested in St. Petersburg and various regions, was
-deported, and towards the end of 1906 was unable to remain in
this region where the possibility of illegal work was closed to me.
I removed to St. Petersburg, where I established connections
with Lenin, Nadezhda Konstantinovna Krupskaya and Mikhail
Ivanovich Kalinin, who worked in the Vasily-Ostrovsky organization and in the trade unions. At that time I worked on the "Zvez<ia'' and on the ''Pravda.'' In this work I had the constant guidance of Stalin and the guidance of Lenin, who sent articles
.and letters to the "Pravda" almost daily. I took part in the
election campaign and was nominated as candidate to the Fourth
State Duma. I had charge of insurance work. And finally, I worked
in the Fourth State Duma, in the Bolshevik group in the
Duma, which was virtually the Russian Bureau of the Central Committee. More exacting demands were made on me, and I developed in this work. At that time Lenin was confined in an Austrian
prison; Stalin and Sverdlov were in exile in Turukhansk. During the
war period we defined our position as defeatists, as advocates of
the transformation of the imperialist war into civil war. I went to
the Urals, then to Sverdlovsk, then to the remote town of Kungur.
At the conference of Bolsheviks which took place in March under
Stalin's guidance, I fully and completely supported Stalin in his
fight against all vacillations and waverings. In 1917 I was transferred to the Urals and put in charge of the work there. In 1918
I was transferred to the centre, and after the revolt of the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries, was made People's Commissar of Finance. Later, after the death of Sverdlov, I was appointed secretary of the Central Committee. I was Lenin's organizational assistant. The daily current work of the Central Committee passed
through my hands.
On all the fundamenflltl economic and political questions during the period of the civil war, I shar~d the political line of Lenin and Stalin and wholeheartedly supported them.
The political rapprochement with Trotsky, which led me to
take up hostile activities against the Soviet system, took place
under the following circumstances.
just before the Tenth Party Congress I had taken part in the
trade union discussion, siding with what was known as the Tsektran opposition, the Trotskyite opposition, as one of its leaders.
Unlike Trotsky, I considered the differences on this question to
731

be temporary and transitory differences on one specific question
of tactics. I assumed that after the Congress I would be able loyally
to continue my Party work. As a matter of fact, the Central Committee adopted a decision to the effect that, after my vacation ..
I was to be transferred, at my own wish, to the Urals as a member
of the Urals Bureau of the Central Committee, for the purpose of
conducting Party work in the Urals. But when, while I was away
on vacation in Germany, the question was reconsidered and a de-cision taken to appoint me ambassador in Germany, Trotsky, on
my return to Moscow in the autumn, began to instill the idea int<>
my head that I, who was not acquainted with foreign countries,..
and who did not know foreign languages, was not a suitable man.
for diplomatic work, that my appointment was not caused by practical considerations but by the desire to keep me away from Party
work, and that I would never be able to return to leading Party
work by normal means.
In 1921 I accepted Trotsky's proposal to take part in the illegal
Trotskyite work which he was then commencing, mustering forces.
and cadres for subsequent open action.
A bureau was formed right then, consisting of Trotsky, Serebryakov, Preobrazhensky, Pyatakov and myself. This was iill
October 1921. My illegal struggle against the Party dates from
this moment.
In the spring of 1922, when I arrived for the Eleventh Party
Congress, Trotsky broached the subject of securing funds for the
internal Party struggle, for the struggle against the Central Committee, which, as he visualized it, would be a prolonged and acute
one. Victor Kopp, who was present, proposed that an attempt be
made to secure funds from the German Reichswehr. This proposal,
at first gave rise to certain vacillations on my part, but I afterwards accepted it and played an active part in the conclusion of
a treasonable agreement with the Germans.
Towards the end of 1923 an open attack of the Trotskyites on the
Party took place. The def eat which we Trotskyites suffered only
served to intensify our resentment and to aggravate the struggle.
In 1926-27 the Trotskyites launched a number of attacks OD
the Central Committee. Simultaneously, a Trotskyite struggle began in the Western Communist Parties as well. Taking advantage
of the situation, the Reicbswehr demanded that we should not
only intensify our espionage activities, but also give certain political promises of future grants of economic concessions in the
Ukraine in case we came to power. Trotsky and I, fearing to lose
a source of funds at a moment of acute struggle, agreed to it
and consented to deepen this treasonable agreement.
At the end of 1927 Trotsky flung all his forces into the struggle,.
but suffered smashing and utter defeat. The Trotskyites were expelled from the Party. The majority of their leaders were exiled.
732

The -masses were against us, and an open struggle offered no pros_pect of success. Accordingly, Trotsky gave instructions to all who
bad been expelled or exiled to get themselves reinstated in the
Party by submitting double-dealing statements to the effect that
they had renounced their views. At the same time he gave instructions for the restoration of the illegal Trotskyite organization, which
now was to bear a purely conspiratorial character.
Its method of struggle was to pave the way for an armed coup.
The means to this end were terrorism, wrecking and diversion.
The change in the tactical line was accompanied by a change
()f program. We had always considered that the building of Socialism
in the U .S.S.R. alone is impossible inasmuch as the bourgeoiscapitalist system was still preserved in the other countries, and
the fascists had come to power in some. We deemed it necessary
to adopt the policy of permitting capitalist relations in the country,
and then, as our connections with the foreign bourgeoisie became
more extensive, we in this way arrived at the policy of direct bour·
geois restoration.
During the meeting in Meran in October 1933, Trotsky expounded to me at length the bourgeois-restorationist program of our
conspiratorial organization and the program for the overthrow of
the Socialist social system existing in the country, adopting for
this purpose methods of terrorism, wrecking and diversion, and
envisaging the subsequent dismemberment of the Soviet Union
and the severance from it of the Ukraine and the Maritime Region.
I accepted the program proposed by Trotsky, and also agreed
to the new methods of struggle. And from that moment I bear
complete political and criminal responsibility for all these methods of struggle.
In February 1935 Pyatakov informed me that an agreement
on a joint armed coup had been reached between the Trotskyites,
the Rights and Tukhachevsky's military group. From that moment I bear responsibility not only for the actions of the Trotskyites, but for the actions of the Rights and of the military conspirators as well.
I cannot, however, refrain from saying that my personal counter-revolutionary activities until the beginning of 1937 were of a
strictly limited character and consisted, firstly, in the establishment and maintenance of illegal connections between the Trotskyite centre in the U.S.S. R., as represented by Pyatakov, and Trotsky,
who was abroad; and, secondly, in the carrying out ofour treasonable agreement with the Reichswehr down to the end of 1930, and,
from the end of 1935, in the selection of cadres for the government
apparatus which was to come to power as the. result of the coun~er­
revolutionary coup. In this counter-revolutionary work of m1_ne
I was connected with Pyatakov, as the leader of the Trotsky1te
centre, with Rosengoltz, who was carrying on the same sort of
733

work, with Rudzutak, the representative of the centre of the Rights~
and with Tukhachevsky, the leader of the military conspiratorial
organization.
I dwell on this limited character of my personal counter-revolutionary activities not because I want to disclaim myresponsibilityforterrorism, wr~cking and diversionan~ for imm;diate preparations for armed action. I have already said that since the end of
J 933, and then since the end of 1935, I bear responsibility for all
these forms of counter-revolutionary work. But for the purpose of
determining the degree of my personal responsibility, as Citizen
the Procurator has said, it is important to know what counterrevolutionary activities I personally performed and what counterrevolutionary acts performed by other participators in the conspiracy were known to me.
I therefore consider it necessary to stress the fact-the Court
knows this from the records of the preliminary and Court investigations--that up to the beginning of 1937 I was not a leader either
of the Trotskyite organization or of the Right-Trotskyite centre.
And only in February 1937, when I, Rosengoltz and Gamarnik
took it upon ourselves to unite all the illegal work of the Trotskyites, and when Rosengoltz and I joined the centre of the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites," did I begin to occupy myself directly
with the preparations for an armed coup and joined in the organization of terrorist acts.
I consider it necessary to stress the fact that I had absolutely
no knowledge of the terrorist acts enumerated in the second section
of the Indictment, and that I learnt about them only when I was
handed a copy of the Indictment.
I further consider it my duty to inform the Court-although
this rather enhances than lessens my responsibility-that for
two years prior to my arrest doubts often arose in my mind as to.
the correctness of this counter-revolutionary, criminal path which
I and the other Trotskyites were following. I stood at the centre
of government work, and I could not but see how the might and
wealth of the Soviet Union were growing, how the standard of
living of the working people was rising and what tremendous cultural progress was taking place in our country.
After the arrest of Pyatakov and Radek and the exposure of the·
Trotskyite organization, I felt that an end must be put to this:
I must either go and tell about my criminal activities, or the couprnust be expedited. I sank to the latter alternative, and embarked
on crime. This, of course, corresponded with the urgings of Tukhachevsky and Trotsky, and I began to make intensive preparations
for a coup d'etat in the very near future.
And it was not untilaftermyarrestthat Imadeacritical survey
of my counter-revolutionary activities. I became convinced of the
shadowiness of our hopes, and I realized the utter hopelessness and
734

criminality of our struggle. I drew the conclusion from this, and
immediately, at the first interrogation, told the i nvestigatingauthorities what had weighed most on my mind during the past fifteen years, what was the darkest and most shameful fact in my
life, namely, my connections with the German military intelligence service. But at that time I did not draw all the conclusions
to the last one. I did not relate everything, I did not expose the
Trotskyite organization, I said nothing about my criminal activities. I did not name a 11 my confederates. It was not because I wanted to enable the organization to continue its counter-revolutionary
struggle that I did not do so. On the contrary, if I had believed
that the organization had not been smashed, that terrorist or diversive acts might still be made, I would have at once told about
it all, because from the very first day of my arrest I realized the
utter criminality of our struggle. But I believed that the organization was smashed, destroyed, that it was incapable of further
action, and that thereforeitwasa question of exposing the shameful past activities of the organization with which I had been connected for fifteen years, and of naming my confederates, people
who had already been smashed and actually no longer represented
any danger. Old habits of thought, old personal connections prevented me at the time from doing this; and another four months.
were required-during which I came to realize and suffer from the
consciousness of my criminal activities-before I related to the
investigating authorities at length all my counter-revolutionary
work, the work of the organization with which I had been connected, and named my confederates. Of cour~, I was unable to give
the investigating authorities a complete picture of the work, I was
unable to name all the Trotskyites belonging to the organization;.
but this was only because I myself did not know everything and
everybody, because I had assumed the leadership of the organization only three months prior to my arrest, so that nobody had initiated me into the affairs and the connections of the organization,
and I had begun to muster the forces of the organization on my own.
initiative. I hope that the sum total of my testimony and the testimony of other arrested Trotskyites have placed the necessarythreads into the hands of the investigating authorities, and that
the Trotskyite organization has now been definitely liquidated.
After that, five months elapsed before the trial began. I continued'
to suffer painfully from the consciousness of my criminal activities.
I not only laid down my arms, ceased to be an enemy, but re-armed
myself; I became another man, and nothing remained within me
of the old collaborator of Trotsky who had conducted an active
struggle against the Soviet power.
This, Citizens judges, is not contradicted by my conduct on the
first day of the trial. I admit that my refusal to plead guilty was
objectively a counter-revolutionary act but subjectively, it was
735

not a hostile sally on my part. The fact is that in the days just
·preceding the trial I was under the painful impression caused
by the gruesome facts I had learnt from the Indictment, and espe·cially from its second section. My disapproval of the criminal past
was only heightened, and not diminished, by the knowledge of
these facts, but it seemed to me beyond my powers to admit my
-gui It to the whole world, to all working people. It seemed to me
€asier to die than to give the world the idea that I was even a remote accessory to the murder of Gorky, about which I actually
knew nothing.
I conclude. My crimes against my country and the revolution
are immense, and I shall accept, as fully merited, whatever verdict you pass, however severe it may be. I request you, Citizens
judges, in passing verdict, to bear in mind that I myself, voluntarily, without confrontations and without being presented with
-0ther incriminating evidence, frankly and fully related my criminal activities and the activities of my organization. I beg you to
bear in mind that I did not take a direct part in the most acute
forms of struggle-terrorism, diversion and wrecking-and did
not specifically know about these actions. I beg you to remember
my former really revolutionary work, to believe me when I say
that during these nine months I have undergone a radical change,
and, by sparing my life, to give me the opportunity to expiate my
-grave crimes in any way, even if only partially.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Zubarev, you have your last
plea.
ZUBAREV: Citizens judges, I fully and completely admit and
-confirm the charges brought against me of crimes against the
Soviet power. I was one of the organizers and leaders of the counterrevolutionary underground organization of the Rights in the Urals,
-and directed the wrecking work in the sphere of agriculture both
in the Urals and here, in Moscow, when I worked in the People's
<Commissariat of Agriculture. I was one of the leaders of a terrorist group and carried on espionage and provocateur activities.
I realize the profound depths to which I have fallen and the full
-gravity of the crimes I have committed. I also realize the utter
gravity of my responsibility before the proletarian Court. I fully
.and entirely agree with the speech of the State Prosecutor, with
the description he gave of my criminal activities, and with his
demand for the supreme penalty. The penalty he demands would
be a merited punishment for the gravity of those crimes I have
<:ommitted. And there is no punishment which the gravity of
these crimes does not warrant.
Realizing my responsibility, I cannot, and have no wish to,
<lefend or acquit myself. It would be ridiculous and false to declare
to the Court that I am an unfortunate victim of inexperience or
736

ignorance, and that I was led astray by some other hand. But,
without defending or acquitting myself, I want to declare, Citizens
judges, that I have said everything down to the last detail both
about my activities and the activities of those of my confederates
whom I knew personally.
In my position, of course, I cannot cite anyfactsormaterial evidence to bear out the sincerity of my repentance, or to corroborate
that I have said everything there is to say about mycriminalactivities. I have only one single argument, if it may serve as an argument and reason at all, namely, the materials of the preliminary
investigation and my honest behaviour and confession of all my
crimes in Court. And if, Citizens judges, this sincerity may in any
degree serve to lessen the gravity of my crimes and to mitigate
the sentence of the Court, if my life were preserved, I would, in
practical work, justify not only in words, but also in deeds, the
confidence of the Court.
THE PRES ID ENT: The accused Rykov may make his last plea.
RYKOV: In my last plea I confirm the admission of my monstrous crimes which I made during the trial. I have betrayed my
country. This betrayal was expressed in my relations with the accursed enemies of the Soviets, in· my stake on defeat.
In its struggle, the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" resorted t<>
the whole arsenal of all means of struggle that have ever been employed by conspiratorial organizations.
I was not a secondary figure in this counter-revolutionary
organization.
We were preparing for a coup d'etat, we organized kulak
insurrections and terrorist groups, and adopted terrorism as a means
of struggle. Nesterov and I formed a special terrorist organization
in the Urals. In I 935 I gave instructions regarding terrorist acts to
Kotov, who headed the terrorist organization in Moscow, and so
on and so forth.
But the State Prosecutor has charged me with something in
which I had no direct part, and which I cannot admit. He has
charged me with adopting a decision, or with giving directions for
the murder of Kirov, Kuibyshev, Menzhlnsky, Gorky and Peshkov.
It is absolutely unquestionable that our adoption of terrorism.
our advocacy of terrorism, was bound to exert some influeoce on
the perpetration of these murders. If terrorism had not been accepted
as a method, if we had not·advocated it, the murder of these people
would not have occurred. In this respect, I must bearresponsibility.
The evidence brought against me in this connection has been
set forth here in detail; it is based upon the statements of Yagoda.
who refers to Yenukidze. Nothing more incriminating was brou~ht
against me at the trial. The Court poS?es~s no other me:ten al.
Some of the people, members of the orgamzation, who were d1rectly
47

737

concerned in these murders, met me from time to time. I ask myself
why, if they knew that I had given instructions or participated
as the guiding spirit in these murders, did not a single one of them
ever say a word to me on the subject? And nothing was ever said.
The assassination of Kirov has formed the subject of two trials.
Both the direct perpetrators and the organizers and leaders of this
assassination have appeared in Court. I do not recall that my name
was mentioned then.
In the second part of his charge against me on this score the
State Prosecutor came to the conclusion that my participation in
these assassinations has been proved by the testimony of Yagoda.
I must say that I cannot deny that on the basis of the sum totaI
of my counter-revolutionary activities, the State Prosecutor has
grounds for suspecting me of these assassinations. But it seems to
me that logical deductions alone are not enough to accuse a manit is true, a man who has been incriminated, against whom there is
evidence of unusually serious crimes-of theseassassi nations as well.
The question was examined here of the bloc of the "Left" Sociallist-Revolutionaries and "Left Communists," which dates back
twenty years. And even this episode in the counter-revolutionary
struggle-an episode which had important consequences, leading
to the assassination of Mirbach, to the shot fired by Kaplan and
the wounding of Lenin, but which nevertheless happened as long
as twenty years ago-despite its rather historical significance, was
examined, it seems to me, ina most exhaustive manner, not leaving
room for any doubts. There were confrontations, direct and immediate witnesses, both "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries and "Left
Communists," who were eye-witnesses and participators in this
entire affair. Why, then, on the question of my participation in the
assassination of five most important political figures, should a
decision be taken on the basis of indirect evidence?
This, it seems to me, would be incorrect. At any rate, I deny
any charge of my participation in these five assassinations.
Until my arrest I believed that Gorky had died a natural
death. But during my confinement I recalled all the conversations
I had had with regard to Gorky not only with Yenukidze but also
with Averbach, approximately from 1928 to 1930.
I had underrated my conversation with Yenukidze, I had underrated the menace to the life of Gorky which lurked in this conversation. But Yenukidze spoke only ab-Out the liquidation
of Gorky's political activities; he spoke with unusual sharpness.
I did not get the impression from the conversation with Yenukidze that any danger was threatening Gorky. For this underestimation I am undoubtedly to blame. It is quite clear to me now
that this was a sort of signal that an attempt on Gorky's life was.
in preparation.
738

When we discussed terrorism, we regarded it as a means of
inflicting a blow on the most important and most powerful link
of the Party. When we spoke of it, before us there always loomed
such figures as Stalin, Voroshilov, Molotov and Kaganovich. In this
connection I must undoubtedly admit the responsibility that falls
upon us for the assassination of Menzhinsky, Kuibyshev, Maxim
Peshkov and Gorky-assassinations that corresponded with the
stand of our organization on terrorism as one of the methods in
our struggle against the Party-and for this I worked no less
than any other member of the counter-revolutionary organization. At the investigation I endeavoured as fully as possible to
tell everything that remained in my memory about the counterrevolutionary activities of the members of our counter-revolutionary organization. This was not easy to do: it was a question
·of long periods of time-eight or nine years-and of a large
number of people, of a very secret conspiratorial organization, so
secret that it was only at this trial that I first learnt of soch members of our counter-revolutionary organization as Ivanov. So that
I cannot, nor can any of the members of the centre, reproduce the
whole picture in full. Here certain discrepancies in the evidence
of individual leaders of the counter-revolutionary organization
are possible. It seems to me that these discrepancies are of no
great moment. But in the course of the trial there were several
passages-of-arms between my fellow-accused, Chernov, and myself. I touch upon this subject not because it has any great significance, or because any principle is involved. I touch upon it
merely in order to avoid the charge of insincerity, the charge of
having concealed something. It seems to me that the rejoinder
Chernov made was incorrect. Of course, any man's memory may
deceive him in some cases, but in this case I cannot admit that I
could have forgotten that I directed in a practical way Chernov's
counter-revolutionary wrecking work in the People's C()mmissariat
of Agriculture. That could not be forgotten. I do not recall it.
Where there were wrecking activities, activities no less serious
than in Byelorussia, I completely admit my guilt. It seems to me
suspicious that Chernov should try in every way to magnify my
authority and to minimize his own role in these wrecking activities, to picture it as being as small as possible. I must say that this
is not true. Already during my first meeting with Chernov in 1928,
when I wanted to recruit him for the counter-revolutionary organization, I found him to be a full-fledged counter-revolutionary,
who had fully developed to, and had even developed beyond, the
counter-revolutionary convictions which I held, without any assistance on my part. So that his independent counter-revolutionary
development cannot be denied by any means. It cannot be denied that
he carried on counter-revolutionary work in the People's Commissar47*

739

iat of Agriculture independently, that he did not necessarily wait
for instructions from me or from the German fascists. He wants
to make himself out to be smaller than he actually is.
As regards Grinko, it is possible that either he or I have forgotten. I grant that it is possible, but I draw your attention to
the fact that we are referring to something that happened in 1936.
He also respects my authority very highly. Of course, my advice
or directions were bound to have some effect, but wrecking work
in the People's Commissariat of JFinance, and Grinko's
relations with the Germans, existed before 1936. That is the most
essential thing in Grinko's evidence.
I should like to say a few words about Bukharin. The State
Prosecutor reproached me with wanting to shield my pal. The
State Prosecutor was quite right in calling Bukharin my pal,
because Bukharin and I were really very intimate. But I would
like to say that Bukharin's reference to some sort of division of
labour is of course wrong. He says that he bore an additional duty
as a writer. There was absolutely nothing in which he was less
active than we were. I rnight[mention a sphere in which, I think,
the initiative belonged to him and in which he played the leading
role from the very beginning, namely, the building up of the bloc.
With Bukharin this arose from the fact that he had occupied a specific position even during the period of the struggle against Trotsky,
and used to say that they must become used to each other while
fighting each other. This was one of Bukharin's typical, verbose somersaults, but it signified his desire not to lose Trotsky. From the
very beginning of the organization of the bloc it was Bukharin who
was the most active; and sometimes he confronted me with an accomplished fact. Of course, l do not want to deny responsibility for the
formation of the bloc. I am too old a man to claim that Bukharin
led me one way or another, but the initiative and the most active
role in this respect undoubtedly belonged to Bukharin.
The State Prosecutor was quite right aboutlBukharin and me
when he said that we must answer for the sum total and for all
the consequences of our counter-revolutionary activities. That is
quite true, and that is why I, as one of the founders of the counter-revolutionary organization of the Rights, who enjoyed certain, sometimes considerable influence among the Rights, of
course answer not only for what I did personally and for what
was done on my instructions, and about which I knew, but also
for the consequences. Of course, there may be varying degrees of
responsibility for one thing or another, but-the State Prosecutor is quite right there-I must answer for what arose on
the monstrous counter-revolutionary foundation, in the laying
of which I, of course, played no little part. And this responsibility t>f mine of course transcends all the discrepancies
740

which still remain regarding certain facts and certain details.
That rou~h!Y is all that I wanted to say in my last plea. Perhaps I am hvmg my last days, and perhaps my last plea is my
last utterance in the literal sense of the word.
I would, in conclusion, like to take advantage of my last plea
in order to try with all my might to influence those of my former
supporters who perhaps have still not been arrested and have
still not laid down their arms, and whom I did not know or have
forgotten. As I enjoyed-true, not quite the influence which
Chernov says I did-but a certain amount of influence, I have
no doubt that if these words are published they will be read, and
perhaps some of my former supporters will be influenced by them.
And so I want, to this end, firstly, that my former supporters
should know that I have given away-as we say in the underground movement-exposed all of them whom I could remember.
I would like those who have not yet been exposed and who
have not yet laid down their arms to do so immediately and openly.
I would like my example to convince them of the inevitability
of their being disarmed, and that they should lay down their arms
at all costs and at the earliest moment, that they should realize
that only by laying down their arms, even at the risk of certain
privations and even arrest, can th~y secure any sort of relief and
disencumber themselves of the monstrous burden which has been
revealed by the present trial.
Salvation lies only in laying down their arms. Their only salvation, their only escape lies in helping the Party, in helping the
government to expose and liquidate the remnants, the dregs of
the counter-revolutionary organization, if any still happen to
remain in any part of the territory of the Soviet Union.
•
THE PRESIDENT: The accused Sharangovich has his last plea.
SHARANGOVICH: Citizens judges, I do not intend to
say anything in my defence. I nave committed loathsome, vile
and heinous crimes against the country and the people, and I
perfectly realize that I must fully answer for them before the proletarian Court. I have betrayed my country, and as a traitor 1
deserve no mercy.
For a long period, ever since 1921, I was a Polish spy and
carried on espionage activities on behalf of the Polish intell_ige~ce
service. During these years, on the instructions of the Polish mtelligence service, I actively carried out espionage and treasona?le
tasks, directed toward undermining the power of the Soviet Umon
and bringing about the defeat of the Soviet U?ion in a ""Yar with !ascist states. I was one of the leaders of the national-fascist organization in Byelorussia which waged a struggle against the Soviet power,
a struggle for the overthrow of the existing Soviet system in U e
741

country. Guided by the direct instructions of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites" and of Rykov and Bukharin personally, on the
one hand, and by the orders of the Polish General Staff, on the
other, our organization strove by its counter-revolutionary activities to bring about the overthrow of the Soviet power and the
establishment of a capitalist system in its place. We attempted to
achieve the severance of Soviet Byelorussia from the Soviet Union
and to place the working people of Soviet Byelorussia under the
yoke of the Polish landlords and capitalists. We desired the defeat
of the Soviet Union in a forthcoming war with the fascist states,
with whose help the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,'' and
we too, under its leadership. worked to bring about the overthrow
of the Soviet power. I admit that I am guilty of this too, and I
once more declare to the proletarian Court that I am guilty and
must be held fully responsible.
I am guilty of the fact that I personally, and the nationalfascist organization of Byelorussia under my guidance, directed
by the centre of the Rights, carried on extensive wrecking and diversive activities in all branches of economic and cultural life.
Together with my accomplices, I undermined agriculture, destroyed horses, depri vedcollective farmers of household land, muddled the planning of crop areas and endeavoured~ from provocateur motives, to incense the collective farmers against the Soviet
government.
In the industry of Byelorussia, we undermined the fuel ba5e,
the power industry, retarded the speed of new construction
work and committed a number of wrecking and diversive acts.
We endeavoured in every way to provoke, to discredit the national policy, the national policy of Lerlin and Stalin; and with
this object in view, we developed extensive wrecking activities
on the principal sectors of the cultural front-in the schools,
the Academy of Sciences, the higher educational establishments,
and so forth.
We ~orned no means in our struggle against the Party and
the Soviet power; we took the path of the physical extermination
of the leaders of the Party and the government.
I once more wish to tell the Court of the terrorist activities
in which I and our underground organization engaged on the instructions of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and of the Polish General Staff.
I am fully responsible for the creation of a terrorist group and
for the preparation of terrorist acts against the leadership of
the Party and the government. In the chain of crimes committed
by meagainsttheSovietpower I am, of course, many times guilty.
I was mature and politically developed, and I cannot,
742

I have not the right to advance my sentiments or my ignorance
as an excuse-that would be a lie, it would be an untruth.
I understood what our aim, the severance of Soviet Byelorussia from the Soviet Union, meant. And not only did I understand
it, but I saw close at handan example of what such severance meant,
what a protectorate meant. That example was Western Byelorussia, where the working people languish under the yoke of the
Polish landlords and capitalists.
I understood this, yet I embarked on the commission of these
·Crimes. I understood that by consenting to become a Polish spy
and to work for the Poles, I was betraying my country. I am sensible of these grave and treasonable crimes. I committed them, and
I admitted them at the preliminary investigation and to you.
I deserve the most drastic sentence of the Soviet Court.
I do not want in my last plea to dwell on all my vile and
treacherous activities and the treacherous activities of my accomplices who are sitting here in this dock, and of our leaders in the
first place, some of whom, instead of sincerely admitting their
despicable, bloody and treasonable crimes, are trying with the
help of theoretical phrases to hide behind the backs of their ac-complices, and to escape answering to the proletarian Court. I
think the Court will see through this and its verdict will be a
just one. Of this I am profoundly convinced.
I have come to understand the full horror of the treasonable
and treacherous crimes I have committed against the Soviet
-people and the Soviet country. I declare to the Court that both at
the preliminary investigation and here in the Cpurt I have
sincerely told everything, down to the last detai I. I desire only one
thing, namely, that my crimes, which I have frankly recounted,
may serve as a warning to those who are still trying to carry oo,
<>r who are carrying on treasonable activity against the Soviet
Union and against the Soviet people. They will all, like me,
undoubtedly be crushed by the whole might of the Soviet power.
I do not plead for clemency, Citizens judges, because I am not
fit to· plead for it. I have told all there is to tell about my crimes,
.and I request the proletarian Court to take this into _accQunL
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for half an hour.

*

*

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
The accused Khodjayev may have his last plea.
KHODJAYEV: Citizens judges, at the preliminary investi743

gation and here, before you, I have related in detail all the grave
crimes which were committed by the nationalist organizations of
Uzbekistan under my direction. I have related to you in detail
the grave crimes which I have committed both as an active member of the bourgeois-nationalist movement and as its leader in Uzbekistan, and as an ally and member of the Right counter-revolutiona ries and, through them, of the whole Right-Trotskyite counterrevolutionary bloc.
From the first moment of my arrest I began to make sincere
confession of the misdeeds I had committed. I did this because I
realized the utter loathsomeness of what has been done by the
bourgeois nationalists in Uzbekistan. I understood what tremendous damage, what severe blows had been inflicted at various
periods of the revolution by this bourgeois-nationalist movement
and by the actions of its leaders. I understood that, as one of
the leaders of this bourgeois-nationalist movement, as a deserter
to the side of the counter-revolutionary Rights and the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites," I had committed grave crimes against
the proletarian state, against the peoples of the Union of Soviet
Republics and against the Uzbek people.
Having decided to make a clean breast of my crimes, I was:
guided by only one consideration, namely, by my sincere confession to help the investigating authorities to bring to light all the
black, counter-revolutionary elements with which I had been
connected. which had bound me, and which were a source of putrefaction that might later constitute a danger of infection. I spared
neither myself nor the other participants in my counter-revolutionary actions, in order to make it easier for the Soviet people's.
p-0wer and the Party to eradicate this evil. I waived my speech
in defence, for I cannot find a single argument, not even a single
word. in any sort of justification of my conduct, my actions and:
the crimes I have committed. I have nothing to say in my defence
and I cannot defend myself. Too much evil has been done, tooserious are the crimes that have been committed, for anything to.
be said in justification, or for any words to efface them.
But I decided to make ~ last plea, and to utilize it to tell the
proletarian Court once more, and our whole country that I have
sincerely and honestly repented, and to convey my repentance
through the proletarian Court to our Soviet people, the Party and
the government.
Citizen the Public Prosecutor has given an annihilating description of the actions of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites. h·
He has also dwelt on the character of the activities of the bour-·
geois-nationalist groups. He has referred to the results of the national policy of Lenin and Stalin, and to the achievements of the
peGples of the Soviet Union.
744

I sta_nd here !n the dock-I am a criminal. Perhaps it is hardly
appropriate comrng from my lips, but I would like to cite the vivid
example of the Republic which I once represented. I am referring
to Uzbekistan.
People who knew Uzbekistan before the revolution, or who were
theretenyears ago and have seen it in recent years, have found the
country unrecognizable. Why? Because it has completely changed.
Tremendous progress in economic and cultural life, the huge
growth of the political activity of the broad masses of the peopleall this has been achieved in relatively so brief a period as ten or
twenty years only thanks to our proletarian revolution, to the Leninist-Stalinist national policy. In 1917 only l1/2 per cent of the
population of Uzbekistan was literate, while today the population of the country is almost universally literate.
Formerly the country had absolutely no industry, but now it
has hundreds of big plants and hundreds of thousands of working
men and women.
The once backward and poverty-stricken agriculture of Uzbekistan is today one of the foremost in the Soviet Union.
During the past five years the standard of living of the broad
masses of the working population, especially of the dekhkan collective farmers, has reached such a level that a return of 20 to30
rubles pei; work-day of the collective farmer no longer surprises
anybody in Uzbekistan. This is all the result of the beneficent
effect of the revolution, of the correct application of the national
policy of Lenin and Stalin, and of the tremendous help which has
been and is being given by the Russian working class to the workers and peasants of Uzbekistan.
Thi swill be clear to anyone from even the briefest analysis of the
general conditions prevailing in Uzbekistan. And I have to tell the
proletarian Court that the policy which was pursued by the bourgeois-nationalist organization to which I belonged, and the counter-revolutionary activities of which I directed, meant for the working masses of Uzbekistan a return to the past. Now that I have
realized the utter criminality of my deeds, now that I have realized into what an abyss I have fallen, it has become more clear to
me, more obvious against the background of the deeds of the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites" unfolded at this trial, that the victory
of this counter-revolutionary line would have meant for Uzbekistan the victory of the blackest reaction, the restoration of feudal
and capitalist relations and, consequently, a new bondage for the
workers and peasants and the broad masses of the people~ of Uzbekistan. Both in economic development and cultural ltfe, Uzbekistan would have been flung back many scores of years. It is
particularly hard for me to talk about this side of the matter, because I now realize it quite clearly, I understand it and am sen745

·sible of the depths to which I have fallen, of the full horror of my
disgrace and the full gravity of my misdeeds. Nevertheless, having
decided to make an open confession of all my misdeeds, I was
obliged to state this too before the proletarian Court and before
public opinion of our country.
Yes, Citizens Judges, I was a bourgeois nationalist; I have committed many crimes. Unfortunately, I cannot obliterate them now,
at this late date, by this belated repentance. They remain hanging
over me. But I became ever more horrible in my own eyes from the
time I realized all my crimes and villainies, after the agreement
with Rykov and Bukharin, after the circumstances which I have
recounted in detail here in Court, and after I joined this conspiracy. Why, even in the period when I was a nationalist, when I also
engaged in anti-Soviet activities and worked against the Soviet
people, even then I was not an organizer of insurrectionary groups,
I was not a member of terrorist groups. I became such, as I have
told you, Citizens judges, only after I had adopted the position
-0f the Right counter-revolutionaries and through them found myself in the camp of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." In this
way I became a participant in the acutest methods of struggle
.against our country, against the peoples of our great Union, against
the Party and the government. This is what I find it hardest of all
to bear, this is what weighs most on my mind.
The state independence of Uzbekistan which was held out in
prospect by the Right restorers of capitalism, even if it became
possible at the price of black treachery, at the price of treason to
the fatherland, the dismemberment of the great Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and by means of preparing its defeat in the
-future war, that is, by means that are absolutely impermissible to
people who have preserved even a shadow of their human shape,
even if, I say, this proved possible at first, itgoeswithoutsaying
thatthisfictitiousstate independence would have been a new disaster
to the peoples of Uzbekistan. I havealreadyspokenofthispartially
when I gave my testimony. I was then answering the questions put
by the State Prosecutor. When I said that having left one shore
we would naturally have to make for another shore, I had nothing
else in mind than the shore where the capitalist countries are located,
imperialist capital, which crushes and oppresses hundreds of
millionsofworkingpeople. And so in this case, too, the victory of
this line, even if the black and disgusting conspiracy succeeded,
would onlyentail newhardshi psforthe working people of Uzbekistan.
I stand disgraced. The nationalist organizations have been
smashed. The accused "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" has been
smashed. This is to the glory of our country, to the benefit of the
peoples of our great fatherland, and to the happiness of the
peoples (}f Uzbekistan. And this thought to some degree alleviates
746

-these last days. of my severe, incre_dibly severe, mental sufferings.
Charactenzrng th.e. "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and its
deeds and people, Citizen the State Prosecutor said that all the
parti~ipants in this bloc must be held jointly responsible for all
1t_s .misdeeds. I cannot help agreeing with the definition given by
-Citizen the State Prosecutor. I consider this definition absolutely
-correct, although I personally knew nothing of the existence of a
-<:ontact centre and knew nothing about many of its misdeeds until
I was imprisoned and began to give testimony. I personally have
never been a provocateur or an assassin. But of what significance
is this when I was anyway a member of this bloc which engaged in
provocation, espionage and assassination. Hence, I must answer
for all its misdeeds.
Citizens judges, not only have you had the bloc before you, not
only have its deeds been demonstrated to you, but all of us, its
participators, have passed before you. It is for you, Citizens judges,
to determine what measure of responsibility each of us must bear.
It is for you to apply or not to apply to us that drastic, but justified, absolutely justified demand of Citizen the State Prosecutor.
I .knew what I was heading for when I discussed matters with
Rykov, when I discussed matters with Bukharin, although much
that was revealed to me in Court caused even me, a criminal, to
:shudder at the horror of it.
Is ·not the very fact of the conspiracy, the very decision that
the Rights should come to power and the bourgeois-nationalists
receive independence-which they wanted to receive at the cost
of the defeat of the Soviet Union and by paving the way for this
defeat-is not this enough to completely justify the application to
us of the drastic measure of punishment which Citizen the Procurator has demanded?
And yet, Citizens judges, standing here in the dock, answering
ior my crimes, I cannot adopt a false pose, for that would merely
be proud words. I cannot say that I do not ask for clemency. I cannot say that. Perhaps there are some who think that the words,
"I do not ask for clemency," would sound proud and well.
But not on my lips, not on the lips of a man who is nailed to the
pillory, who stands in this dock. Words of pride would be out of
place on the lips of such a man. There is no ground forprid~! We shall
not go down in history as men who rendered any se~c~s to the
·people, with any good deeds to show. If we go down 1n history at
all it will be as hardened criminals, as heroes of bandit deeds,
.as people who have sold their honour and conscience. The word
~'pride" sounds fine on the lips of a man, a real man, of whom
Gorky, the great writer and ~reat man of our country, wrot_e. But
on the lips of people who either themselves had a hand in the
murder of Gorky, or were in some way implicated in it, on the lips
741

of people who have brought about the death of this man, on the
lips of people of our type, such words sound false. Yes, I would
be a liar were I at this last hour to say that I did not crave clemency. I want to live. I want to live because I have realized the
full depth of my fall, I have realized the full gravity of my crimes.
I have learnt a severe lesson, but then l have learnt something
else. It seems to me that I have really learnt how a real man, a
real citizen of our great fatherland should serve his people, his
country. And having realized this, having fully and completely
laid down myarms, I cannot but ask for your indulgence, Citizens
judges, because, if it is possible, I should like my life to be preserved. I should like underanyconditions, in any form, in anyplace,
now or in the future, to wash away the disgrace which now lies
upon me.
I ask for life so that perhaps, in the remainder of my days,
I might obliterate at least some particle of my crimes and my profound guilt. I want to live so that somehow, somewhere, I may again
prove useful to our great country and serve the great cause of the
building of Socialism, to which all the thoughts and all the strength
of the finest people of our great Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
are devoted.
THE PRESIDENT: The accused Ze lensky may have his last plea.
ZELENSKY: Citizens judges, I take advantage of my last plea
not to say anything in defence or excuse of my grave crimes. Such
crimes, and such criminals as I, have no right to defence or exoneration.
My grave crimes against the Party, the country and the revolution have brought me into the dock as an enemy of the people
and as a member of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." There
can be nothing more heinous than this.
Citizen the State Prosecutor has correctly described the criminal activities of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" and my
own crimes as one of its members.
I am guilty of treason and of treachery to the revolution, of
having served in the tsarist Okhrana; I am guilty of having for
many years concealed these crimes from the Party. I am guilty of
having in 1929 joined the counter-revolutionary organizationof
the Rights, and of having, through it, joined the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites.,,
I am guilty of having wormed my way into high posts that demand the particular confidence of the Party, by playing a double
game and by camouflage. I utilized the confidence shown in me
in order to deceive the Party; I carried on undermining, wrecking~
counter-revolutionary activities, stirring up discontent among the
population against the Soviet power.
Addressing the accused in the dock, Citizen the State Prosecutor
748

spoke yesterday of the sincerity which each of us should display
<>n the threshold of our last hour.
On the threshold of my last hour, I would like first of all to
relate how I came to fall. I want to relate this in order that my
exam~le n:ight serve to war~ those who are still vacillating, who
are still discontented, wavermg, and who harbour doubts in the
Party leadership and in the correctness of the Party line. I want
to speak of this not in order to exonerate myself or mitigate my lot,
but in order to show how people sink to such shameful depths.
What led me onto the path of treason and treachery? It was a
petty-bourgeois disbelief in the forces and victory of the revolution. Cowardice impelled me in my youth to become a traitor,
provocateur and servitor of the tsarist Okhrana. This fact was
enough to cripple me as a man and to destroy me as a revolutionary. My past crimes weighed upon me for many years; my past
activities as a provocateur determined a certain aloofness on my
part from honest members of the Party.
The difficulties of collective farm development engendered in
me a disbelief in the strength of our working class, a disbelief in
the strength of our state, and this pre-determined my joining the
counter-revolutionary organization of the Rights. Even when 1
joined the organization of the Rights I did not immediately become a wrecker. I endeavoured to advocate my ideas, to carry
them into effect, but the wrecking character of my proposals was
immediately exposed. I had either to renounce my Right views
and to work honestly in my Soviet post, or to go underground, to
engage in wrecking and to recruit followers for this purpose. I
chose the second path, the path of struggle against the Party and
the government, the path of wrecking, which has led me to this
shameful dock. I continued to play a double game, and
for doubledealers there is only one path-the path of un<ierground counter-revolutionary activities. And it is to such
counter-revolutionary activities that I sank. In 1933 I became a
wrecker and began to recruit supporters for the Rights. But I
succeeded in recruiting for the Rights only people who had committed crimes against the Party, or who were careeris~ selfseekers, and the like. The shameful example of my fall shows
that the slightest rift with the Party, the slightest insincerity
towards the Party, the slightest hesitation with regard to the leadership, with regard to the Central Committee, is enough to land
you in the camp of· counter-revolution.
I engaged in wrecking activities in the consumers' co-operative
societies. Citizen the Procurator characterized my wrecking activities
as having been directed against the growth of trade and the development of the trading system, and towards undermining the normal supply of commodities to the population. He is right; I have nothing to

749

add and no objections to make to this conclusion. I have told the
Court what sectors have been affected by the wrecking activities.
carried on by myself and my accomplices. I have told the Court
what damage was caused to the state and to the people by my wrecking activities. I must say that my wrecking activities grew much
more intense beginning with 1935 on the direct instructions of
Antipov. Wrecking activities caused a good deal of damage and
really did hamper the development of trade and the trading
system, and thus disrupted the supply of commodities to the
workers and collective farmers. I endeavoured in my testimony to
reveal the hotbeds of wrecking and the methods of wrecking work,
with the object of facilitating the earliest possible liquidation of
the consequences of these wrecking activities. I did this in order
that my self-exposure might help in some degree to correct the
tremendous harm that was caused by my wrecking activities.
I must say here that the Soviet co-operative movement has
very often been subjected to, and is still being subjected to, the
attacks of bourgeois capitalist co-operators. The bourgeois cooperators of capitalist countries, those who, like us, the counterrevolutionaries, are in the service of the bourgeoisie, try to discredit the Soviet co-operatives, utilizing the false information
we supplied and our wrecking activities in order to prove the·
impossibility of the development of the Soviet co-operatives.
I must say that despite our wrecking activity, despite our
undermining work, the Soviet co-operatives steadily grew in
strength; and when we counter-revolutionaries, wreckers are
removed, it will progress further.
We endeavoured to win recruits among the rank and file. We·
wanted to extend our base in the countryside by relying on the
kulak elements. I must say that the rural co-operative workers
very rapidly detected our criminal efforts and that we met with
a severe rebuff from the overwhelming part of the rank-and-fileco-operative workers, who are honest and devoted to the Soviet
power. These masses rejected every attempt at the restoration of
capitalism, and us, who made the attempts. The elimination of
wrecking activities, and the eradication of all the participators
in our despicable activities will lead to the extremely rapid
growth of trade and the trading system.
Citizens judges, I must say that the sum total of our crimes,
our vile and treacherous activities, is horrifying. judging these
activities, and endeavouring to switch to Soviet lines, I can find
only one honest thing which we could do in the course of the investigation, the interrogation. This only honest thing open to us
was relentlessly and thoroughly to expose to the country, to the
revolution, to the revolutionary people, all our vile actions and
crimes, all our accomplices and confederates, all the monstrous

750

criminal activity of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," the
underminin~ work which I had engaged in from the very outset.
The testimony I gave about my crimes, and my exposure of
my accomplices followed from my realization of my criminality,
falsity and treachery.
It is painful, extremely painful, to feel that you are an enemy
of the people, to see and know that you are in the wrong, to see
and feel that the people are against you, to be always a counterfeit,
and to act covertly.
Long before my arrest I had already lost faith in the Rights
and realized the hopelessness of their struggle. That is why I
immediately gave frank testimony to the investigating authorities. This is the only thing that could reinstate me in the ranks of
Soviet people, if not to live, then at least to die as a Soviet man.
I had clearly foreseen the collapse of the Rights long ago. Why
did I not break with them, why did I not expose myself and my
criminal associates? This question might legitimately be put to
me by the Court and the State Prosecutor. I must say that having
every opportunity to do so, I should have done so; but I was
in the hands of the Rights, having committed crimes. I feared the
exposure of my past. I did not expose the gang of bandits, I did
not give away my accomplices-that shows the depths to which
I had fallen.
I clearly foresaw the collapse of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' when we, the Rights, attempted to frustrate the campaign
against the kulaks, the rout of the kulaks, that last of the exploiting classes. And when this failed, I, together with the
Rights, became a direct fascist agent, became a wrecker; and I
must admit that my wrecking activities thereby became part of
the general plan of disruptive work of the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites," which was performed on the instructions of foreign
agents, and the purpose of which was to_ bring about a coup
d'etat in our Union.
Monstrous deeds and monstrous crimes-a sample of our
vile Right-Trotskyite work, of our vile Right-Trotskyite underground activities, in which to my shame, disgrace and misfortune, I participated. I must, however, say that even for me, a
participant in this underground activity, much of what has been
revealed in the trial was new, unknown and dumbfounding.
The talk of Bukharin, i:he leader of the Rights, about the treachery and criminality of provocateurs and spies is valueless. For,
Bukharin, you yourself are a past master in this art, you haveshown a chain of crimes and treachery against the Party and the
government by your actions, by your behaviour in Court. We are
puppies compared with you. You, Bukharin, want to come out
of it unblemished. But you will not succeed. You will go down
751

in history with us, branded with the shameful stigma that marks
the foreheads of all of us. I have heard speeches made here, and at
the preliminary investigation and in the last pleas of the Trotskyites and Bukharinites. I had expected that they would really expose everything to the very end. I expected that the Trotskyites
and Bukharinites would open up one other page of their crimes
against the Soviet power, against the Party, against Lenin,
crimes committed in 1921. They should have done so, if only to
destroy the legend that Trotsky's attack in 1921 was a sort of
legal discussion. Nothing of the kind! I take advantage of my last
plea to do it for them. I want to help the Court and the investigating authorities to reveal these crimes. I want to elucidate facts
which cast a vivid light on the activities of the Trotskyites against
the Party in 1921. These facts are very little known to the public.
I now affirm, in the light of the events of 1918 revealed by the
investigation in this Court, that what confronted the Party in
1921 was not a discussion but a conspiracy. I affirm this on the basis of the following facts. The actions in Moscow in the beginning
-0f 1921 of the Trotskyites, of Bukharinites like Boguslavsky,
Drobnis, Sosnovsky, Rafail and other Mensheviks who then joined
the Party, and Mensheviks who remained outside the Party and
who continued to come out openly as Mensheviks, and the actions
of the counter-revolutionaries who had formed a bloc with Trotsky,
did not differ from each other in any way and all bore a Kronstadt character. All these anti-Party, anti-Soviet elements acted
in concert; developing furious activity in January and February
1921, utilizing the food and fuel difficulties, they attacked the
Central Committee and Lenin, endeavouring to organize strikes
and to bring the workers out on the streets. I have no time now,
and my position does not permit me to dwell on this in detail. I
only say this because those who endeavoured to provoke the workers
to strike, and who partially succeeded in this, endeavoured to
penetrate to the Khamovniki barracks, to get possession of arms
and to gain the following of the Red Army men. The attempt failed. These facts and documents are to be found in the archives of
the Moscow Soviet and the Moscow Party Committee. Simultaneously with the collapse of this attempt, a plot was discovered
in a Rifle Division in Zamoskvorechye, a plot of Whiteguard officers and Mensheviks. The commander of the Moscow military
area, Petrayev, a former lieutenant of artillery and a protege
of Trotsky's, was dismissed on suspicion of being implicated
.in this plot. Trotsky objected to the dismissal of Petrayev just
because he knew that Petrayev was implicated in the plot. It
can now be said with certainty that Trotsky at the time employed his double-dealing method: while formally adhering to the
platform of the October Revolution, he mustered his followers

752

w~th~n the P~rty f~r the purpose of blowing up the Party from

w1thm. I affirm this. I also affirm that the armed force of this
planned coup was a military conspiracy. Urtder these circumstances, the attempt to penetrate into the Khamovniki barracks was
a signal for action to the plotters. About this you have said nothing, Messrs. the Trotskyites and Bukharinites. I am convinced
that a detailed investigation of the facts will supply rich material
about this plot and put an end to the legend that what took place
in 1921 was a mere discussion. As a member of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites," I cannot but bear responsibility for its vile,
treacherous and brigand activities. I also bear responsibility for
the crimes which I committed myself.
Myguiltisaggravated bythefactthatl for a long time deceived
the Party, betrayed the confidence it placed in me; I wormed my
way into high and responsible posts. I need hardly mention that I
repent. The proof of my repentance is the testimony, the exposure
of myself and my accomplices which I made in Court and at the
preliminary investigation.
I am making my last plea. It will most likely be the last utterance in my life. I find it hard to ask and expect that my words
be creditec\, But I declare to the Court that I did not know, that
I took no part, that I dissociate myself from such crimes as the
preparations· for a coup by means of a military conspiracy; that
I did not know about the criminal decision of the centre to assassinate Kirov, that I knew nothing about espionage matters and
connections and had no relations with foreign intelligence services; that I had no relation whatever to the negotiations with foreign
states regarding the severance of national republics and regions
from the Soviet Union, nor did I have any relation to the terrorist acts committed by Yagoda and others. This is also borne out
by the material of the investigation.
·
I say. this not i)l order to evade responsibility for these crimes.
I cannot but bear responsibility ·for these crimes just as much as
Bukharin and Rykov and the direct perpetrators of these misdeeds. I know that as a member of the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites'' I bear the stigma of these shameful deeds as well
and that nothing will remove this shameful stigma from me.
- My crimes against the Party, the country and the rev~lution- ·
ary people are great indeed. That is why I can find no reasons,
no grounds, to seek for mitigating circumstances for my crime and
my guilt. My repentance and confession of my crimes have come
too late. They would have been of value if they had come before
rriy arrest. That is why I cannot ask for any mitigation cf .my
lot. I shall accept the verdict of the proletarian Court as a Just
retribution meted out to me by the Socialist state, the people and
the Party for my crimes.
48

753

THE PRESIDENT: Accused Ikramov may make his last
plea.
IKRAMOV: Citizens Judges, I waived my speech in defence.
not because I did not want to say anything in my defence. If I
were to say that I could say something in my defence, but do not
want to, that would be a pretence, a continuation of the phariseeism and duplicity by which I was affected right down to my
arrest and to the time I began to testify. This is not the hour,.
this is not the moment, for me to pretend, or to continue to play
the pharisee and double-dealer. I could not find even words, let
alone arguments, to justify and defend my crimes. Criminals like
the participators in the Right and Trotskyite nationalist bloc, and
not only participators, but active participators like myself, can
scarcely find words in any language to say in their defence. That
is why I was obliged to waive my defence. I cannot say anything
in my defence, all the more that I am not a political infant, nor
a dotard, an "old shoe,,, as they say; I am neither the one nor the
other. I spent half my life (I am forty years old) in politics, that
is, twenty years, and I therefore cannot plead youth and inexperience in my defence. I cannot, nor have I any desire to, hide behind,
the back of Bukharin or of anybody else. This is not bragging. I
may be ignorant of theory, but politics I understand, and understand them no worse than Bukharin. I say this not in boast, but
in order to expose the depths of my crime. That is why I say it.
When I spoke here of how Bukharin won me over, or of the·
instructions which I received from the Right-Trotskyite centre·
through Bukharin or Antipov, I had no desire, not the least desire,.
to shift the blame on anybody else. No, I only recorded the fact
of my participation and the receipt of various instructions given
by the Right leaders to us, the members of the Right-Trotskyite·
nationalist anti-Soviet bloc.
In my testimony both at the preliminary investigations and
here I have concealed nothing, I have told everything. I bear responsibility, and not only for the crimes I myself committed, or
which were committed by the nationalist counter-revolutionary
organization which existed in Uzbekistan-I also bear full
responsibility for such actions of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" as espionage or the dastardly murder of such famous people of the Soviet country as Alexei Maximovich Gorky, Kuibyshev and Menzhinsky, and for the participation in the assassination of Sergei Mironovich Kirov. Nevertheless, it is a relief to methat I, a participator in this conspiracy, an active participator,.
b.ear full responsibility on all the points which were here published, both as these crimes are reflected in the criminal code and
as these facts were revealed at the trial.

754

The counter-revolutionary organization which existed in Uzbekistan, which was directed by me, and which formed close contacts with the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,'' called itself a
"nationalist" organization. This term "nationalist" might give
some people the impression that we wanted to do something for
the benefit of our nation. But we betrayed the interests of our
nation. I then realized to what depths I had sunk, bow far I had
fallen. just see, the nationalists claimed that they wanted to
work for the benefit of their nation, but what actually came of it?
Actually, they engaged in wrecking activities in municipal enterprises, they engaged in wrecking against the people, they
engaged in wrecking against the improvement of living conditions
and they engaged in wrecking in agriculture, all in order to frustrate the measures of the Soviet government and the Communist
Party, when the Soviet government and the Communist Party
were improving the condition of the nation. The nationalists
pretended to be striving for "independence,'' but what they were
actually striving for was dependence. The nationalists, in striving for "independence,'' were striking at the pocket of the worK:ing people, at their standard of living.
This disgrace cannot be justified in the eyes of the Court, in
the eyes of the workers, and it cannot be justified in the eyes af
the nation of Uzbekistan in particular.
Citizen the State Prosecutor has vividly described the rising
standard of living and culture of the nations of the Soviet Union.
I think, I am convinced, that Uzbekistan may serve as one of the
most striking examples of this, especially the rate of progress it is
making.
We were only a hindrance and an obstacle to this progress.
Were it not for us, Uzbekistan would have attained far greater
and much finer achievements.
Everybody knows that before the revolution famine often
raged in Uzbekistan, malaria was prevalent, and people perished
from these and other maladies. People perished from starvation
and malaria. But the Soviet power put an end to all this.
Our nationalist counter-revolutionary organization only tended to foster these diseases and to bring about starvation and
death. That is why my guilt, my crimes are so grave.
The nationalists wanted to drown Uzbekistan in the blood of
the workers and dekhkans. They pretended that they wanted "independence,'' but the logic of the struggle would have led to this
"independence" being transformed into dependence.
Now the Uzbek nation, like all the other nations of the Soviet
Union, is dependent on nobody; it is dependent only upon its
collective will, its collective decision. Only in this is it dependent;
in all else it is independent.
755

The "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" wanted to deprive the
Uzbek nation of its independence and to make it dependent on imperialist states, on beks, bais, plutocrats and parasites. It is a good
thing that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' was not victorious. If the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" were victorious
there would be a veritable massacre the very next day, conflict
would at once break out between the Trotskyites and the Rights in
the Ukraine, Byelorussia, Uzbekistan and other republics. The
ideology of the Rights, if they had any ideology left, was the restoration of capitalism. The ideology of the nationalists was the
ideology of the kulaks, the ideology of the capitalists.
And in spite of this, such a union of forces took place. In spite
of this unprincipledness, principles for a union were found.
This only aggravates the disgrace of the participants in this "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites." We were all united by only one principle-the struggle against the Soviet power.
Realizing all these crimes, all these shameful deeds, I can
find no grounds to ask for clemency. I thought, I too am one of
the people who gave evidence, not after eight or ten months, as
some said, but on the sixth or seventh day of the investigation.
I thought that this might mitigate my crimes. But I have lost
all grounds for asking for clemency. I behaved very criminally
before my arrest. Some have mentioned here that they enjoyed
confidence, that the attitude of the Party and the government towards them was a good one. This was very painful for me to hear;
it was the worst, the keenest internal punishment for me to hear
people speaking of confidence.
What should I have said to justify the confidence which was
placed in me by the leaders of the Party and the government? Instead of justifying that confidence, I abused it.
In 1930, when Zelensky proposed that I should be removed from
my post in Uzbekistan, he was instructed by the Central Committee to show to Ikramov all the material incriminating Ikramov,
to acquaint him with it. The Central Committee expressed complete confidence in me. A month or a month and a half later I received another telegram, from which I learnt that in order to
support Ikramov, the Central Committee had appointed him Secretary of the Central Asiatic Bureau of the Central Committee of
the C.P.S.U. Instead of responding to this confidence with sincerity, I played a double game. What can I say now in my defence,
what words, what arguments can I use in pleading for elem.
ency.?
.
l have said this in passing. I do not know whether anybody
sitting here in this shameful dock, whether any of these creatures
who once were men, enjoyed as much confidence as I did before
my arrest.
756

Before I was arrested I was shown a heap of material collected
by the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs. This was the
testimony of people given in 1937, it was material that concerned
me. I was told to read it and say whether it was true or not. I must
say that in this respect I was treated very considerately by Nikolai
Ivanovich Yezhov, who spoke to me four times. And what did I do?
I denied everything point-blank. This disgrace therefore cannot in
any way be mitigated by the fact that on the sixth or seventh day
I changed my mind and began to give sincere and honest testimony. This does not in any way diminish or mitigate the serious·
ness of my fall.
I must further say that I have not the least desire to shield
myself behind Bukharin or the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,"
but I must say that our nationalist program was greatly enriched
and activized in counter-revolutionary deeds thanks to the participants in the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" sitting here with me
in the dock, and especially its Right section, headed by Bukharin
and Antipov. We borrowed the acute methods of struggle from
them, and we not only borrowed them, but realized what we were
doing. And they kept on spurring us on, reproaching us for working
badly, for wrecking inadequately, for organizing revolts badly,
and so on. Sometimes we asked why this new point had appeared
in our struggle against the Party. The reply usually was that the
logic of the struggle now demanded the employment of this method. But the logic of the struggle has led us to this shame, from
which, whe.ther we live or die, we can never free ourselves. We havE
been quite rightly called enemies of the people, traitors to the
fatherland, spies and assassins.
These shameful stains we cannot obliterate, do as we will.
In connection with this, Citizens judges, I must say that when
1 repented, when I came to realize the full gravity of my crimes1
I found it very hard to come here and answer for my crimes publicly, before the Court. You know that when your conscience is
stirred, it is very difficult to stand up before the people and to look
them in the face. When I gave my testimony I very much feared
to have to meet the ~ople sitting here.
Fully admitting all the crimes committed by me and by the
nationalist organizatian in Uzbekistan which I directed, admitting
my crimes as a participant in the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,,.
I have told all I knew, named all the accomplices in the crimes1
and have laid down my arms. And so, if there is anything that. c~n
be said in my favour when asking for mercy, for clemency, 1t ts
that I, a beast in man's shape, stand absolutely naked. I have told
everything I know. I have lanced the ulcer within me. And I now
feel greatly relieved. I thought that if I told all this to the Court the
people would know, the people would know that this Ikramov,
757

even if in the last hour of his life, abandoned and renounced the
position which is called treachery, espionage, enemy of the people
and the fatherland; they would know that he abandoned this position and died an honest Soviet citizen. This is a great relief to me.
And if it is to be so, this will be a certain consolation to me.
I only recently realized how painful it is to be an enemy of the
people. All the more painful is it to be an enemy of such a country
as the land of the Soviets.
I do not say all this so as to save my vile skin. I say this so
that every citizen of the Soviet Union may know what criminals
we are, what the nationalists were making for, and whither they
would have led the peoples of Uzbekistan. Our path was the path
of oppression, the path of enslavement for the peoples of Uzbekistan.
The path of the Communist Party leads to freedom, to a prosperous, cultured and contented life. I say this so that all may know
that the bourgeois-nationalist talks of the nation only in order to
deceive the people, and so that not a single nationalist who still
remains undiscovered may be able to speculate on national matters
in Uzbekistan. That is why I have related all my crimes here and
spoke about them at length at the preliminary investigation.
Any verdict the Court may pass I shall consider absolutely just
and right. But I would simply like to say that I do not want to
die, sti 11 less do I want to die an enemy of the people, and that
I would like anywhere, in any place, to atone for the grave crimes
which I have committed in company with these people.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Rakovsky.
RAKOVSKY: Citizen President of the Court, Citizens judges,
yesterday I listened with great and rapt attention to the speech
for the prosecution delivered by the Procurator of the Union 1
not because Ii ntended to enter into a controversy with him. I have
no such intention. I confessed to all my crimes. What would it
matter for the substance of the case if I should attempt to establish here before you the fact that I learned,pf many of the crimes,
and of the most appalling crimes of the "bloc 8f Rights and Trotskyites, ''here in Court, and that it was here that I first met some of the
participants? It is of no import whatever. I am connected with
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," of course within the limits
defined by the Criminal Code, by that complicity, both political
and juridical, which follows from the fact that I belonged to this
bloc.
Like a galley-slave fettered to his galley, I am fettered to the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" with the heavy chain of my crimes.
i participated in the underground counter-rev.olutionary Trotskyite
organization up to the last moment, to the moment of my arrest.
758

I was an active member of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites.,.
I committed the gravest crimes against the state. I am doubly
.a spy. In 1924 I established criminal connections with the British
Intelligence Service, and in 1934 I established criminal connections with the Japanese intelligence service. In 1927 I carried
on negotiations with some of the Right capitalist circles in
Fra nee, the object of these negotiations being in the long run a Jso
directed against the Soviet Union. In 1935 I fook advantage of the
fact that the French Minister Laval was on a visit in Moscow,
accompanied by French journalists, in order to attempt in a conversation with one of them (I mentioned his name) to hinder,
to disrupt, the Franco-Soviet rapprochement. Citizens judges, I
informed you about Trotsky's letter of July 1934, in which he
·wrote of the necessity of isolating Stalin internationally, that is
·to say, of strengthening, consolidating the capitalist encirclement
around the Soviet Union. I belonged to the so-called "Fifth C-01umn" of which the Procurator spoke yesterday, and I have deserved all those maledictions which are oow sweeping from all corners of the Soviet land against us sitting here in the dock, maledictions of which the speech for the prosecution delivered by
the Procurator, however severe and trenchant it -was with regard to
us, was perhaps but a weak reflection.
,
Citizens judges, I share the State Prosecutor's regret that
·enemy of the people Trotsky is not here in the dock alongside of us.
The picture of our trial loses in completeness and depth because of
the fact that the ataman of our gang is not present here. Nobody
will suspect me of saying this from a selfish desire, from a base
motive to shift on to Trotsky a part of that guilt and that responsibility which I myself bear. I am older than Trotsky both in years
.and in political career, and I probably have no less political
experience than Trotsky. I regret his absence here forconsiderations
-of a political nature. I am sorry~ because Trotsky>s absesce in
this dock means that no matter how his opportunities may be limited, his activities will continue, and this presents a danger, even
'if a small <me, for the international labour movement. It is true
that even beyond the Mexican meridian Trotsky will not escape
that complete, final, shameful ignominy which we all are under·going here.
This, in substance, covers everything relating to the legal,
juridical aspect of my case, and I would have even foregone
·my last plea had I not considered it necessary, after what
was said here by the Procurator, to try in my turn to point
.out the exceptional political importance of the present tria 1.
But it seems to me that Citizen the Procurator dwelt on only
-one aspect of the case. Yes, he stressed the monstrosity of .the·
-crimes which we committed, but I should like to turn your attention,
759

Citizens Judges, to the fact that the monstrosity of this is also
determined by the persons who committed these crimes.
Who were those who committed espionage, wrecking, acts of
diversion, terrorism, murder? They were committed not by candidates for criminal court records, people living in slums and cellars.
The criminals sitting here had to be taken from the house of the
government. And thus the question which arises and to which I,
as one of those involved, feel.the necessity to find an answer, is the
question as to how former members of the Central Committee,
former members of the government, former ambassadors have ended
up here. What form of insanity brought them to this dock of political
infamy? I think that this is all the more necessary since this
question faces every one of us and every one is searching for
an explanation. I shall mention one explanation which is widely
current. After all, this is not the first trial. I remember how this
question was answered in connection with the other trials. People
are satisfied with the trite and shallow bourgeois explanation,
according to which all revolutions finish by devouring their own
children. The October Revolution, they say, did not escape
this general law of historical fatalism.
It· is a ridiculous, groundless analogy. Bourgeois revolutions
did indeed finish-excuse me if I cite here some theoretical
'arguments which, however, are of significance for the present
moment-bourgeois revolutions did indeed finish by devouring
their own children, because after they had triumphed they had to
suppress their allies from among the people, their revolutionary
allies of the Left.
But the proletarian revolution, the revolution of the class
which is revolutionary to the end, when it applies what Marx
called "plebeian methods of retaliation," it applies them not to
the advanced elements, it applies them to those who stand in the
way of this revolution, or to those who, as ourselves, were with
this revolution, marched along with it for a certain time, and
then stabbed it in the back.
And I, an active Trotskyite, a very close personal friend of
Trotsky (the Procurator has established that our friendship was
of 34 years' duration), a man who after many had returned (true,
with duplicity) into the Party, continued for many .more years
to carry on an open struggle against the P~rty leadership. I want
to answer this question. Permit me to share with you my thoughts
on this subject.
Citizens judges, why indeed did it happen that I turned against
my Party and in the end sank to the status of a criminal? What
did we Trotskyites represent in the Party? We were what is known
as an alien body in the living Party organism. Trotsky joined
the &lshevi~ Party only a few months before the October
760

Revolution, his ideology took shape in the fight against Bolshevism.
I joined the Party at the end of 1917, after I had belonged for more
than a quarter of a century to the Second International, which developed under entirely specific conditions, under the conditions
of _peaceful ?evelopment of capitalis:n, and, although I belonged
to its Left wing, I was permeated by its opportunism. If you trace
back the history of other Trotskyites, if I take Radek, Pyatakov,
Preobrazhensky as examples, you will find that both before the
October Revolution and after the October Revolution every one
of them was guilty of a number of serious deviations.
And it must be said that from the very first moment we Trotskyites adopted the attitude of antagonists of the Party leadership.
From the very first moment. Brest-Litovsk. I shall not refer here
to the testimony (you know it) which clarifies Trotsky's role
during the period of the Brest-Litovsk negotiations. The discussion
about the trade unions. What was that? It was a trial of forces.
The accused Zelensky mentioned facts here which will perhaps
reveal that there was in general another attempt there, only, as.
far as I remember, all the persons whom he mentioned did not
belong to the Trotskyite faction, but to the so-called D. C. faction,.
the faction of Democratic Centralism. We suffered defeat and
immediately adopted an orientation toward foreign states. It is
sufficient just to remind you of the fact which was here established.
We suffered defeat in 1921 in the discussion on the trade unions.
The Party in its striving to consolidate its internal unity removed
a number of Trotskyites from the Central Committee.
In 1921 Trotsky already gave his first instruction about establishing criminal connections with the German intelligence service.
Jn 1926 came the second instruction. The first instruction was
given to Krestinsky, the second to Rosengoltz. At the end of 1924
a recruiting agent of the intelligence service called on me; I could
have thrown him down the stairs, because he resorted to blackmail.
But when he said: "Do not forget that we obtained the agrement
for you because we learnt that you were a Trotskyite," this touched
the Trotskyite strain in me. I gave no answer at the time, I talked
it over with Trotsky. We knew the position we were in. I had been
removed from the Ukraine, some had been removed from the
Central Committee, Smirnov had been removed from the Siberian
Revolutionary Committee, Radek and Pyatakov were also at a
loose end, and Trotsky was saying that in the very near future,
within the next few days, he would have to quit the Revolutionary
Committee, unless he wanted to be ousted from it with a bang.
I am arraying all these facts so that the picture may become
clear: In 1926 we already established connections with the foreign
int el 1igence service. In 1927 it became apparent that we were suffering defeat, and that it would be a defeat after which no manoeuvre
761

would succeed, because before that defeat the Zinovievite-Trotskyite
-0pposition stood at attention before the Party and remained in the
Party while continuing to work against the Party; we knew that at
the Fifteenth Congress of the Party, at the very latest, we would
be expelled, if not all of us, at any rate Trotsky. Now we had to
pass on to work in secret. After that I left for France. In August
.and September I carried on negotiations about uniting the opposition and about what we could obtain from certain French circles in
-0rder to gain victory.
I shall not r'elate the history of Trotskyism, it is well known.
I only want to speak about the formation of the "bloc of Rights
.and Trotskyites. ''The formation of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was, if we may put it that way, "a marriage of convenience,"
-each party contributing its dowery. We Trotskyites contributed
-0ur connections with foreign intelligence services, the Rights
.contributed their cadres, their connections with the nationalist,
Menshevik, Socialist-Revolutionary and other elements, their
connections with the kulaks. Of course, in addition to this fixed
.capital of ours, each could contribute something else. We did not
hesitate before perfidy, before deceit, treason, bribery, murder by
means of poison or the revolver instead of the traditional dagger.
I shall not speak of any ideology of this bloc. You heard here
the platform of my fellow-accused in this trial, N. I. Bukharin.
This, of course, represents restoration of capitalist relations in
two leaps, through opening the sluices for free trade with abroad,
through the return of the kulaks, through the liquidation of the
collective farms, through opening the doors wide for concession
.capital. We calculated that we would achieve the complete
triumph of capitalism in an extremely short period of time.
Ours was, of course, a counter-revolutionary ideology. We
wanted to rely for support on the elements which had already
been doomed by the Five-Year Plans, the elements which had been
swept away, cast out. Of course there is nothing surprising in the
iact that these old ruins came down with a crash and we found our-selves buried under the debris. I think that this is not enough. In
my opinion, there is no precedent of politically minded people,
people who had a definite political past, experience, and so forth,
displaying such naivete, such self-delusion, such illusions as those
which held sway over them. Yes, it was raving, real raving, the
ravings of a madman to think that way, but we did think that
way. We thought that with our insignificant forces, not onlywith<mt any base of support, but with the working class against us, with
i:he Party against us-we thought that we could achieve some results.
These were ravings, calculating on some kind of foreign assistance.
Ravings in what sense? This foreign assistance would utilize us and
then throw us overboard. From a political force, we became a tool.

762

Ravings in every respect. Our misfortune was that we occupied
responsible posts, that power had made us dizzy. We were blinded by that passion, by that ambition for power. This cannot be
explained by "ideology" alone. These two factors, taken together
and acting in combination, brought us to the dock.
We considered ourselves to be people sent by providence; we
consoled ourselves with the thought that we would be summoned,
that we were needed. This is what both the Trotskyites and the
Rights said. We did not notice that the entire development of the
Soviet Union swept over us, that the peaceful revolution which
.transformed our countryside swept over us, that this immense
growth of the cultural and political level of the masses of the
people and the creation of new cadres of politically trained
people from among the Stakhanovites swept over us. All this
-swept over us, unnoticed by us.
-The sobering moment had to come. Perhaps I wi II somewhat
.contradict what the Procurator said, but I am of the opinion that
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" was doomed to disintegration. Of course, this does not absolve the bloc of the respon-sibi lity for the crimes which were committed.
There was no political future whatever in store for us. For
many of us the moment of sobering had not arrived, because it
began only after we had been arrested.
Citizens judges, I told everything that I committed, without
concealing or holding back a single fact. Both during the Court
investigation, during the preliminary investigation, and during
the trial (I think I will not be mistaken if I say so) I was not found
-guilty of a single contradiction or of concealing any fact.
I think that this proves that I revealed myself before you fully
.and entirely, that I stand fully and entirely exposed.
I wish to make one appeal to you, an appeal which would never have escaped my lips if this were a different court. But I make this
appeal to you because I see in your persons the Soviet Court, the
ptoletarian Court. It is an appeal for mercy. Yesterday the State
Prosecutor made this task in a certain sense easier for me, inasmuch
as he did not demand the supreme penalty for me. But I must say
that in the gradation of the minimum and maximum which the
<;itizen Procurator mentioned here, there is a certain limit which
exceeds the limits of my age. I want to mention this only: that, in
applying the appropriate articles of the law to me, you may consider this circumstance and form your decision in accordance, so
to speak, with the physiological limitations of the accused who
stands before you~
Citizens judges, from my young days I honestly, truthfully and
-devotedly performed my duty as a soldier of the cause of the e~n­
dpation of labour. After this bright period a dark period set in,
763

the period of my criminal deeds, of treason to the fatherland, a
series of dark crimes which I briefly summed up before you today.
I told you all I knew, I told everything, I concealed nothing, I held
back nothing, I repent deeply and sincerely, and I ask you to give:
me the opportunity to redeem even if an insignificant part of my
guilt, even by the most modest work, no matter under what circumstances. I have finished.

THE PRESIDENT: The accused Rosengoltz may~ make his
last. plea.
ROSENGOLTZ: After the description given me by the Prosecution, I should like in my last plea, in my last address to people,
to recall to myself and also to others those pages in the story of
my life wh\ch I may call bright and which raise no suspicion
on anybody's part. First of all, a few words about my biography.
I want to speak of it all the more that I have never engaged in
writing reminiscences or memoirs.
During the years of my tenderest childhood I was brought up
by a woman who was a professional revolutionary, a SocialDemocrat.
My very earliest recollections are searches made by gendarmes.
When I was only ten years old, my hand, the hand of a child, was
used to hide illegal literature during the night and to recover it in
the morning from a place where the hand of a grown-up could
not reach.
I joined the Bolshevik Party when I was only fifteen or sixteen years old. I was first arrested when I was sixteen years old.
At the age of seventeen, I was nominated by a Bolshevik group as
delegate to the Unity Congress of the Party under the pseudonym
of "Stepan," which was the pseudonym under which I carried on
my work.
During the difficult years of tsarist reaction I did not desert the
Party. During the imperialist war I actively championed the Bolshevik defeatist stand. In Moscow in particular I carried on a
campaign in opposition to Chkheidze; I was one of the organizers
and chairmen of a meeting of workers' representatives in .Moscow
which was held in 1915. During the tramwaymen's strike we seized
the hall of the City Duma in carrying out measures to support
this tramwaymen's strike.
Do not think that I want to engage in bragging, but, still>
I should like to recall what was good in my life, what was unquestionably good.
During the October Revolution I brought the first military
unit, the Cyclistp• battalion, to the Moscow Soviet. I think
that I can also feel more or less gratified with my active role as
member of the Revolutionary Committee. During the Civil War,
764

the Central Committee of the Party sent me from one army to an<lther, to the more difficult sectors. The confidence which the Central Committee then placed in me found expression even in the fact
that I held a mandate, issued by Lenin and Sverdlov, which gave
me .t~e right. of exp.elling members from the Party by my own
<leclSlon. This was in 1918. I may say that I did not then betray
the confidence which was placed in me by this mandate. I was
sent by Vladimir Ilyich personally to a number of armies-to the
Seventh Army and to the Thirteenth Army, to the Leningrad front
.and to the Southern front. It is with a warm feeling that I recall
now the attitude which I always met on the part of Vladimir Ilyich
when I came to Moscow from the front. I recall the great support
which Stalin always gave me during the Civil War. I recall that
during the period of the struggle in the Thirteenth Army on the
approaches to Tula, Stalin, ·on his own initiative, insisted that
Pyatakov be removed from that army, and that I become the head
<>f the army on this most important sector of the front. I recall
that in the Seventh Army, near Leningrad, a month before Yudenich's offensive, Stalin, who came there at the request of Vladimir
Ilyich, defended me against the campaign which was carried on
against me in the course of a number of controversies on strategical problems, and he insisted (I consider it necessary to mention it here, because it has also a certain historical significance,
it is a fact that is little known), Stalin insisted and brought about
the dispatch of considerable military forces to Leningrad, which
forces arrived just before Yudenich began his offensive. If Stalin
had not brought this about with Vladimir Ilyich's support, Yudenich 's offensive might have encountered quite a different picture.
If I recall these various episodes of the Civil War, if I recall
with satisfaction my work in the army, I men ti on this not for the purpose of mitigating the sentence. I want to explain the reason. A simple human reason: after all that I have lived through, after the
feeling of shame which I experienced during this trial, after the
monstrous crimes which I committed, I have no incentive or desire
to ask for the mitigation of my sentence.
This is not a rhetorical figure. This does not mean that
it is without a feeling of pain that I part with the beautiful land
of the Soviets. We have beautiful new shoots now, a new generation
reared by the Bolshevik Party. We have. such an upsurge in the
Soviet Union as no other country in the world can boast. The pain
.of parting is intensified by the fact that we already have absolutely real results of Socialist construction. For the first time
now we have a life, a full-blooded life, scintillating with joy and
·Colour. Millions, tens of millions of people, children and citizens
-0f the Soviet Union, including my own children, sing the
:Song:
765

"Native land of mine, so beautiful ...
There is no other land the whole world over
Where man walks the earth so proud and free."
And l repeat these words, I, a prisoner, repeat these words:
There is no other land the whole world over where there is
such enthusiasm of labour, where such gay and joyous laughter
rings, where song and dance resound so free, where there is such
beautiful love; and I say: "farewell, my native land, my own!, ..
I want people to believe me. I want nothing from the Court, nor
from people. I do not want and cannot permit myself a single word
of falsehood in this, my last address to people.
There is not a single man in the world who brought so much
sorrow and misfortune to people as Trotsky. He is the vilest agent
of fascism. The Procurator was right, and Rakovsky was right when
they said that here, in the dock, it is Trotsky in the first place who.
is missing.
Trotskyism is not a political current but an unscrupulous dirty
gang of murderers, spies, provocateurs and poisoners, it is a dirty
gang of henchmen of capitalism. This is the function which Trotskyism is performivg everywhere, in all countries, including the Soviet Union.
The lesson and the conclusion which must be drawn from this.
trial by the vast masses in the Soviet Union consists, in the first
place, in the fact that the general line of the Bolshevik Party must
be kept undeviatingly pure. Woe and misfortune will betide him
who strays even to the smallest extent from the general line of the
Bolshevik Party. I want you to believe me, to believe in the
sincerity of the words which I now utter.
I say: Long live, flourish and grow in strength the great, mighty~
beautiful Union of the Soviet Socialist Republics, advancing from
victory to victory, and over which shines the magnificent sun of
Socialism.
Long live the Bolshevik Party with the best traditions of enthusiasm, heroism, self-sacrifice, which can only be found in the
world under Stalin's leadership. In the inevitable clash of two
worlds, Communism will emerge victorious. Long live Communism
throughout the world!
THE PRES 1DENT: The Court is adjourned until 6 p. m.
[Signed]

PREsIDENT:

v. ULRICH

Army Military JurislI
PresUlent of tlU! Muiwy Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U .S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A. BATNER.
Military Jurist Firat Rank

766

EVENING SESSION, MARCH 12, 1938

THE COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming
please rise.
•
THE PRES ID ENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Bukharin, you may make your last plea.
BUKHARIN: Citizen President and Citizens judges, I fully
agree with Citizen the Procurator regarding the significance of the
trial, at which were exposed our dastardly crimes, the crimes committed by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,,, one of whose
leaders I was, and for all the activities of which I bear responsibility.
This trial, which is the concluding one of a series of trials, has.
exposed all the crimes and the treasonable activities, it has exposed the historical significance and the roots of our struggle
against the Party and the Soviet government.
I have been in prison for over a year, and I therefore do not
know what is going on in the world. But, judging from those fragments of real life that sometimes reached me by chance, I see,
feel and understand that the interests which we so criminally betrayed are entering a new phase of gigantic development, are now
appearing in the international arena as a great and mighty factor
of the international proletarian phase.
We, the accused, are sitting on the other. side of the barrier,
and this barrier separates us from you, Citizens judges. We found
ourselves in the accursed ranks of the counter-revolution, became
traitors to the Socialist fatherland.
At the very beginning of the trial, in answer to the question
of Citizen the President, whether I pleaded guilty, I replied by a
confession.
In answer to the question of Citizen the President whether I confirmed the testimony I had given, I replied that I confirmed it
fully and entirely.
When, at the end of the preliminary investigation, I was sumIllQned for interrogation to the State Prosecutor, who controlled
the sum total of the materials of the investigation, he summarized
them as follows (Vol. V, p. 114, December 1, 1937):
Question: Were you a member of the centre of the counter-

767

revolutionary organization of the Rights? I answered: Yes, I admit it.
Second question: Do you admit that the centre of the antiSoviet organization, of which you are a membe.r, engaged in counter-revolutionary activities and set itself the aim of violently overthrowing the leadership of the Party and the government? I answered: Yes, I admit it.
Third question: Do you admit that this centre engaged interrorist activities, organized kulak uprisings and prepared for Whiteguard kulak uprisings against members of the Political Bureau,
against the leadership of the Party and the Soviet power? I answered: It is true.
FQUrfh question: Do you admit that you are guilty of treasonable activities, as expressed in preparations for a conspiracy
aiming at a coup d'etat? I answered: Yes, that is also true.
In Court I admitted and still admit my guilt in respect to
the crimes which I committed and of which I was accused by Citizen the State Prosecutor at the end of the Court investigation and
-on the basis of the materials of the investigation in the possession
of the Procurator. I declared also in Court, and I stress and repeat
it now, that I regard myself politically responsible for the sum total
of the crimes committed by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites • .,
I have merited the most severe punishment, and I agree with
Citizen the Procurator, who several times repeated that I stand on
the threshold of my hour of death.
Nevertheless, I consider that I have the right to refute certain
.charges which were brought: a) in the printed Indictment, b) during the Court investigation, and c) in the speech for the Prosecution made by Citizen the Procurator of the U.S.S.R.
I consider it necessary to mention that during my interrogation
by Citizen the State Prosecutor, the latter declared in a very categorical form that I, as one of the accused, must not admit more than
I had admitted and that I must not invent facts that have never
happened, and he demanded that this statement of his should be
placed on the recorcls.
I once mo·re repeat that I admit that I am guilty of treason
to the Socialist fatherland, the most heinous of possible crimes, of
the organization of kulak uprisings, of preparationsforter.roristacts
and of belonging to an underground, anti-Soviet organization. I fur-.
ther admit that I am guilty of organizing a conspiracy for a "palace
.coup." Anp this, incidentally, proves the incorrectness of all those
passages in the speech for the prosecution made by Citizen the State
Prosecutor, where he makes out that I adopted the pose of a pure
theeretician, the pose of a philosopher, and so on. These are profoundly practical matters. I said, and I now repeat, that I was a
leader and not a cog in the counter-revolutionary affairs. It fol-

768

low~ f;om ~his, as.wi 11 be clear to everybody, that there were many
spec1f1c things which I could not have known, and which I actually
did not know, but that this does not relieve me of responsibility.
I admit that I am responsible both politically and legally for
the defeatist orientation, for it did dominate in the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites," although I affirm:
a) that personally I did not hold this position;
b) that the phrase about opening the front was not uttered by
me, but was an echo of my conversation with Tomsky;
c) that if Rykovheard this phrase for the first time from me, then,
I repeat, it was an echo of my conversation with Tomsky.
But I consider myself responsible for a grave and monstrous
crime against the socialist fatherland and the whole international
proletariat. I further consider myself responsible both politically
and legally for wrecking activities, although I personally do not
remember having given directions about wrecking activities. I did
not talk about this. I once spoke positively on this subject to Grinko.
Even in my testimony I mentioned that I had once told
Radek that I considered this method of struggle as not very expedient. Yet Citizen the State Prosecutor makes me out to be a
leader of the wrecking activities.
Citizen the Procurator explained in the speech for the prosecution that the members of a gang of brigands might commit robberies in different places, but that they would nevertheless be responsible for each other. That is true, but in order to be a gang the
members of the gang of brigands must know each other and be in
moreorlessclosecontactwitheachother. Yet I first learnt the name
of Sharangovich from the Indictment, and I first saw him here in
Court. It was here that I first learnt about the existence of Maximov, I have never been acquainted with Pletnev, I have never been
acquainted with Kazakov, I have never spoken about counter-revolutionary matters with Rakovsky, I have never spoken on this
subject with Rosengoltz, I have never spoken about it to Zelensky,
I have never in my life spoken to Bulanov, and so on. Incidentally,
everi the Procurator did not ask me a single question about these .
people.
The "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" is first and foremost a
bloc of Rights and Trotskyites. "How then, generally, could it include Levin, for example, who stated here in court that to this day
he does not know what a Menshevik is? &w could it inelude Pletnev, Kazakov and others?
Consequently, the accused in this dock are not a group. They
are confederates in a conspiracy along various lines, but they are
not a group.in the strict and legal sense ?f the word. All th~ accused
were connected in one wayoranother W1th the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites,,, some of them were also connected with intelligence
49

769

services but that is all. This, however, provides no grounds for asserting 'that this group is the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
Secondly, the ''bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," which actually
did exist and which was smashed by the organs of the People's
Commissariat of Internal Affairs, arose historically. It did really
exist until it was smashed by the organs of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs. It arose historically. I have testified that
l first spoke to Kamenev as far back as 1928, during the Sixth
Congress of the Comintern, which I at that time directed.
How then can it be asserted that the bloc was organized on
the instructions of fascist intelligence services? Why, this was in
1928! By the way, at that time I narrowly missed death at the
hands of an agent of the Polish "Defensiva," a fact very well
known to everybody who stood close to the Party leadership.
Thirdly, I categorically deny that I was connected with foreign
intelligence services, that they were my masters and that I acted
in accordance with their wishes.
Citizen the Procurator asserts that I was one of the major organizers of espionage, on a par with Rykov. What are the proofs?
The testimony of Sharangovich, of whose existence I had not even
heard until I read the indictment.
The record of Sharangovich 's testimony was submitted to me,
.from which it appears that I practically drew up the plan for wrecking.
SHARANGOVICH: Stop lying, for once in your life at least.
·You are lying even now in Court.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Shararigovich, don't interrupt.
SHARANGOVICH: I could not restrain myself.
BUKHARIN: Take Ivanov. Generally, what I have to say about
his testimony is the following. Certain persons, who were connected
.with the Okhrana in the past, testified that from fear of exposure
they decided to wage a struggle against the Soviet power, and that
they therefore joined the Rights, the underground organization,
which orientated itself on terrorism. But where is the logic?
Fine logic, indeed. From fear of possible exposure they joined a
terrorist organization, where they ran the risk of being caught the
very next day. This is hard to imagine; I at least cannot imagine
it. But Citizen the Procurator believed them, although all of it
sounds very unconvincing.
· Khodjayev asserts that I advised him to get in contact with the
British resident agent, while Ikramov says that I told him that
Turkestan was a choice morsel for England. In reality, this is far
from the truth. I told Khodjayev that advantage should be taken
of the antagonisms between the imperialist powers, and in a
.vague form I supported the idea of the independence of Turkestan.
N~t a single word was said about any resident agents. Citizen
770

the State Prosecutor asked: But did you see Khodjayev? I did. Was
-this in Tashkent? It was in Tashkent. Did you talk to him about
politics? About politics. That means that you spoke about the resident
agent. Such conclusions were drawn several times; and when 1 protested against them, Citizen the Procurator accused me of not telling the truth, of trying to wriggle out of it, of wishing to conceal
the truth, and so on; and in this he was supported by a number of
my fellow-accused. But it seems to me that in this case real logic
is wholly on my side. Citizen the State Prosecutor declared on
the basis of these materials that all the espionage connections proceeded through the channels of Rykov and Bukharin. Yet Citizen the
Procurator said that every word was important here. The speech
of Citizen the Procurator contained references to two Japanese news·papers. But why does it follow that these reports refer precisely to
-me and the Rights?
I, however, admit that I am guilty of the dastardly plan of
the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R., for Trotsky was negotiating
about territorial concessions, and I was in a bloc with the
Trotskyites. This is a fact, and I admit it.
I categorically deny my complicity in the assassination of
Kirov, Menzhinsky, Kuibyshev, Gorky and Maxim Peshkov. According to Yagoda's testimony, Kirov was assassinated in accordance with a decision of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
I knew nothing about it. But what Citizen the Procurator calls
.logic co·mes here to the aid of the factual content. He asked whether
Bukharin and Rykov could have stood aside from these assassinations; and he answered that they could not have stood aside beca~
they knew about them. But not standing aside and knowing are
one and the same thing. This is what in elementary logic is called
tautology, that is, the acceptance of what is yet to be proved as
already proven. But what is the real explanation? It might be said:
Well, then, you villain, how do you explain these facts? Can you
-deny that some decision was adopted by some section or other with
the knowledge of Yenukidze· and Yagoda, or you deny even that?
I cannot deny it, Citizens judges. But if I cannot deny it, and at
the same time cannot affirm it, I can make a certain conjecture.
After all, you must bear in rnind the secrecy of the work. The centre
did not hold meetings: matters were discussed as occasion arose, and
given such secret methods of communication and connections with
each other, such things are quite possible.
As to Maxim Peshkov. Yagoda himself says that this assassi'tlation concerns him personally. I have no right to intrude into
this sphere. But this is Yagoda 's statement, fortified by so
'fundamental a fact as his request to have the matter heard in camera, a fairly weighty consideration. Yet Kryuchkov says that it w~s
.done in order to lower Maxim ,Gorky's buoyant tife tonus. And, 1f
49*

771

I am not mistaken, one of the Counsel for Defence also adopted this
viewpoint. But this can be seen through. This argument is countered by so weighty a fact as Yagoda 's personal statement, which is
corroborated by the fact that this point was referred to the session
in camera.
As to Menzhinsky. Bulanov testified to personal motives here
too. Menzhinsky was already ill, he could not have injured the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites'' in any way.
Why, then, can this be regarded as likely?
I will dwell on Bulanov's testimony.
The most painful and most horrible thing is the death of Alexei
Maximovich. What testimony did I give, how did I give it, and
under what circumstances? I was asked (apparently the investigation had already furnished material on the subject) whether
I did not recall anything that could throw light on the hostile attitude of the Right and Trotskyite parts of the bloc towards Gorky.
I recalled the conversation with Tomsky which I mentioned here
in Court and about which the Procurator interrogated me. The substance of this conversation was that Tornsky cursorily remarked that
the Trotskyites were preparing to commit hostile acts against the
Stalinist, Gorky. It absolutely did not occur to me at the time that
he could refer to a terrorist act. I turned a deaf ear to it. During
the interrogation I recalled this conversation with Tomsky. To the
insistent demands of Citizen the Procurator I steadily replied that
the thought of a terrorist act had not occurred to me at the time.
Here in Court, in reply to one of the questions of Citizen the
Procurator, I said: "But now I see that it was to this he was
referring." Citizen the Procurator drew the following conclusion
from this; he said: "What is this, if not a veiled admission?"
A veiled admission of what? What is admitted? The fact that I had
learnt in Court a number of new facts which had not been known
to me, and that therefore the conversation I had had with Tomsky
might retrospectively be regarded in an entirely different perspective. I consider that the argumentation of Citizen the State
Prosecutor in this case cannot be regarded as adequate.
Take the year 1918. Citizen the Procurator declares that in 1924
I was compelled to makeaconfessionregarding such and such a conversation in the Smolny. I was not compelled; I experienced absolutely no pressure on me to do so; nobody but myself even hinted at
it, and I published this example in order at that time, 1923-24,
to show the utter harm of the factional struggle, and what it
was leading to. So that firstofall I would like to clear up this misunderstanding.
Citizen the State Prosecutor said that Bukharin cited nothing
in refutat~on of the evidence of the five witnesses, who stood here
in this Coort before us all, before Citizens the judges of this case,
772

who as5erted that I had the design, the thought, the idea, which
I. insistently advocated, of arresting Leni nand physically destroying
him, and, moreover, to Lenin were added two other prominent figures in the Party-Stalin and Sverdlov. But it ts not true that
I cited no arguments in refutation. Citizen the Procurator may consider them untrue, feeble, unconvincing, but it cannot be said that
I cited nothing in refutation. I cited a number of arguments.
The chief witness was Varvara Nikolayevna Yakovleva. Varvara Nikolayevna Yakovleva datesthis whole incident about the
preparations for the conspiracy with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries against Lenin, Stalin and Sverdlov, for their
arrest and supposed murder, etc .. -she dates all this in her
evidence, and then at the confrontation and during the trialto the period prior to the Peace of Brest-Litovsk. I said at the confrontation, at the preliminary investigation, and in Court, that it
is not truu It is not true that before the Brest-Litovsk Peace the
"Left Communists" and the Trotskyites wanted to effect a coup
d'etat by forcible means; it is untrue because the Trotskyites and
the so-caIIed "Lefts" had the majority in the Central Committee,
and if the Trotskyites had not capitulated at the decisive moment
when the vote on the question of the Brest-Utovsk Peace was taken,
the Trotskyites and the "Lefts" would have had the majority in
the Central Committee. That being the case, how can it be supposed
that they then capitulated in order to resort to conspiratorial
methods? Everybody who lived through that period remembers
perfectly well that the feelings of the "Left Communists" at that
time, before the Brest-Litovsk Peace, were such that they hoped to
win a Party majority at the next Party Congress. That being the
case how could there have been any talk about that of which the
witness Varvara Nikolayevna Yakovleva now speaks? But I cited
another example. Varvara Nikolayevna Yakovleva asserted that the
Moscow Regional Bureau was the factional centre of the "Left
Communists." I then took the liberty of mentioning several
names, several respected members of the Party. I only wanted in
this way to discredit the argument of Varvara NikoJayevna Yakovleva. It is well known that a number of prominent peopleKuibyshev, Emelyan Yaroslavsky, Menzhinsky and others-were
at that time supporters of the "Left Communists,,. belonged to
my "Left" group. The relative importance of these people was
far greater than that of the Mantsevs, Stukovs and the rest; and
by political temperament and political activity they were mo~e
efficient than the persons mentioned. And so until the Brest-L1tovsk Peace the central group in Leningrad comprised the persons
mentioned. And so I ask, how could there have been a plan of revolt if these people held the key p-05ition in the central. group? It
is inconceivable, it is impossible. And here Varvara N1kolayevna

773

Yakovleva, the principal witness against me, is mixing things up
with an entirely different period, the period following the Brest,
Litovsk Peace, the Moscow period.
I beg your forgiveness, Citizens Judges. for fixing your attention
onthispoint: but asitis a very grave matter and a very interesting
one, and as so much attention was devoted to it in the Court, I took
the liberty of repeating what I have already said. Yet Citizen the
State Prosecutor asserted that I cited nothing to exonerate myself
on this point.
I will not dwell on other things, because I do not want to take
up your time. I admit that there was one conversation with Karelin and Karnkov; and the initiative with regard to the arrest of
Lenin for twenty-four hours and the subsequent bloc with the
"Left" Socia Ii st-Revolutionaries proceeded from the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. But in the first conversation the reply was
negative in a rude form. And as regards the fact that negotiations were subsequently conducted ·through Pyatakov with the
'·Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries-and this may be considered,
as Citizen the Procurator, if I am not mistaken, formulated it, an
attempt to overthrow the Soviet power by forcible means-this
I admit; it was the case. As to the plan of physical extermination, I categorically deny it, and here the logic to which
Citizen the State Prosecutor referred, namely, that forcible
arrest implied physical extermination, will not help in the
least. The Constituent Assembly was arrested, but nobody suffered physically. We arrested the faction of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, yet not a single man of them suffered physically. The "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries arrested Dzerzhinsky, yet he did not suffer physically. And I say-and this was
omitted from the speech of the State Prosecutor-that in these
criminal and dastardly conversations, it was specifically stipulated that not one hair of the persons concerned should be injured.
You may think what you like, but it is a real fact. ·
This episode after the Brest-Litovsk Peace genenrlly took up an
extremely short space of time, because very soon afterwards the
"Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries began to act. We had toa.rrest the
faction of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. I myself took part in
this operation, I myself took pait in directing the arrest of the
faction of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. After .this we had
nothing more to do with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries generatly. I went abroad on revolutionary work, then returned, then,
I repeat, I was wounded by a "Left" Socialist-Revolutionary bomb.
I do not deny that it was not thrown at me personally, as the witness Mantzev stated, but I want to say that everybody knew
that I was to deliver a lecture in -the building of the Moscow
Committee, and it was at this moment that the atteITipt was made
.

l

77~.

and I was slightly wounded. A number of leading figures in the
Party were killed. As is known this attempt was made by the bloc
of th~ "f:eft" Socialist~Revolutionaries, headed by Cherepanov
and his wife, Tamara, with the so-called underground anarchists.
I mentioned Mantsev because Cherepanov was arrested by the
"Left Communist" Mantsev, as he was not an ally of Cherepanov.
It is not true that Bela Kun encouraged the "Left" Socia listRevolutionaries.
I want to say that there was one brief period of criminal conspiracy between the "Left Communists" and the ''Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries which quickly collapsed after their action,
in the suppression of which a number of "Left Communists" took
an active part.
To support his speech, the State Prosecutor advanced a number
of other points which were to provide a base for a period, a black
period, in my life.
There are a number of mistakes here. First of all, I was never an
Otzovist, although the State Prosecutor says I was.
The State Prosecutor accuses me of the fact that I worked with
Trotsky as an editor of the magazine "Novy Mir,,, and that I had
a bloc with Trotsky. I object to this.
The State Prosecutor accuses me of having opposed Comrade
Stalin in 1924. I do not remember any such case. I now conclude my
obJections to certain charges which the State Prosecutor brought
against me in the course of the trial. and I wi 11 return to the crimes
I actually did commit. I have already enumerated them twice.
The gravity of these crimes is immense. I think it is unnecessary
to repeat how grave these crimes are; it is clear enough as it is.
I only want to say that the Trotskyite section on more than
one occasion acted separately, and it is possible that individual
members of the bloc, like Yagoda, may also have acted separately.
because Yagoda, as Bulanov testifies, regarded Rykov and myself
as his secretaries, and he himself in this Court has called me a
chatterbox who organized idiotic mass uprisings when it was a
question of a coup d'etat. But I am connected with the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites," and it is quite natural that I politically answer absolutely for everything.
The extreme gravity of the crime isobvious, the political responsibility immense, the legal responsibility such that it will justify
the severest sentence. The severest sentence would be justified,
because a man deserves to be shot ten times over for such crimes.
This I admit quite categorically and without any hestitation at all.
I want briefly to explain the facts regarding my criminal activities and my repentance of my misdeeds.
I already said when giving my main testimony during the trial,
that it was not the naked logic of the struggle that drove us, the
775

counter-revolutionary conspirators, into this stinking underground
life which has been exposed at this trial in all its starkness. This
naked logic of the struggle was accompanied by a degeneration of
ideas, a degeneration of psychology. a degeneration of ourselves,
a degeneration of people. There are well-known historical examples
of such degeneration. One need only mention Briand, Mussolini
and others. And we too degenerated, and this brought us into a
camp which in its views and features was very much akin to a
kulak praetorian fascism. As this process advanced all the time
very rapidly under the conditions of a developing class struggle7
this struggle, its speed, its existence, acted as the accelerator, as
the catalytic agent of the process which was expressed in the acceleration of the process of degeneration.
But this process of degeneration of people, including myself,
took place i nabsolutely different conditions from those in which the
process of degeneration of the international labour leaders in Western Europe took place. It took place amklst colossal socialist
construction, with its immense scope, tasks, victories, difficulties,
heroism ....
And on this basis, it seems to me probable that every one of us
sitt}ng here in the dock suffered from a peculiar duality of mind,
an incomplete faith in his counter-revolutionary cause. I wi 11
not say that the consciousness of this was absent, but it was i ncomplete. Hence a certain semi-paralysis of the will, a retardation of
reflexes. It seems to me that we are to a certain extent people with
retarded reflexes. And this was due not to the absence of consistent
thought, but to the objective grandeur of socialist construction.
The contradiction that arose between the acceleration of our degeneration and these retarded reflexes expressed the position of a
counter-revolutionary, or a developing counter-revolutionary, under
the conditions of developing socialist construction. A dual psychology arose. Each one of us can discern this in his own soul, although
I will not engage in a far-reaching psychological analysis.
Even I was sometimes carried away by the eulogies I wrote of
socialist construction, although on the morrow I repudiated this
by practical actions of a criminal character. There arose what
in Hegel's philosophy is called a most unhappy mind. This unhappy
mind differed from the ordinary unhappy mind only by the fact that
it was also a criminal mind.
The might of the ·proletarian state found its expression not only
in the fact that it smashed the counter-revolutionary bands, but
also in the fact that it disintegrated its enemies from within, that
it disorganized the will of its enemies. Nowhere else is this the
case, nor can it be in any capitalist country.
It seems to me that when some of the West European and American intellectuals begin to entertain doubts and vacillations in
7'16

connection with the trials taking place in the U.S.S.R., this is prima~ily d~e. to ~he fact that these people do not understand the
radical distinction, namely, that in our country the antagonist,
the enemy, has at the same time a divided, a tlual mind. And I think
that this is the first thing to be understood.
I take the liberty of dwelling on these questions because I had
c~msiderable co~tac~s with these upper intellectuals abroad, especially among scientists, and I must explain to them what every
Young Pioneer in the Soviet Union knows.
Repentance is often attributed to diverse and absolutely absurd
things like Thibetan powders and the like. I must say of myself
that in prison, where I was confined for over a year, I worked,
studied, and retained my clarity of mind. This will serve to refute
by facts all fables and absurd counter-revolutionary tales.
Hypnotism is suggested. But I conducted my own defence in
Court from the legal standpoint too, orientated myself on the spot,
argued with the State Prosecutor; and anybody, even a man who
has little experience in this branch of medicine, must admit that
hypnotism of this kind is altogether impossible.
This repentance is often attributed to the Dostoyevsky mind,
to the specific properties of the soul ( "l 'ame slave,, as it is called),
and this can be said of types ·like Alyosha Karamazov, the heroes
of the "Idiot"and other Dostoyevsky characters, who are prepared
to stand up in the public square and cry: "Beat me, Orthodox
Christians, I am a villain!,.
But that is not the case here at all. "L 'Ame slave" and the
psychology of Dostoyevsky characters are a thing of the remote
past in our country, the pluperfect tense. Such types do not exist
in our country, or exist perhaps only on the outskirts of small
provincial towns, if they do even there. On the contrary, such a
psychology is to be found in Western Europe.
I shall now speak of myself, of the reasons for my repentance.
Of course, it must be admitted that incriminating evidence plays
a very important part. For three months I refused to say anything
Then I began to testify. Why? Because while in prison I made
a revaluation of my entire past. For when you ask yourself: "If you
must die, what are you dying for?"-an absolutely black vacuity
suddenly rises before you with startling vividness. There was
nothing to die for, if one wanted to die unrep-ented. And, on the
contrary, everything positive that glistens in the Soviet Union
acquires new dimensions in a man's mind. This in the end
disarmed me completely and led me to bend my knees before the
Party and the country. And when you ask yourself: "Very well,
suppose you do not die; suppose by some miracle you remain alive,
again what for? Isolated from everybody, an enemy of the. people,
in an inhuman position, completely isolated from everything that
777

constitutes the essence of life ... " And at once the same reply
arises. And at such moments, Citizens judges, everything personal,
all the personal incrustation, all the rancour, pride, and a number
of other things, fall away, disappear. And, in addition, when the
reverberations of the broad international struggle reach your ear,
all this in its entirety does its work, and the result is the complete
internal moral victory of the U.S.S.R. over its kneeling opponents.
I happened by chance to get Feuchtwanger's book from the prison
library. There he refers to the trials of the Trotskyites. It produced
a profound impression on me; bnt I must say that Feuchtwanger
did not get at the core of the matter. He stopped half way, not
everything was clear to him; when, as a matter of fact, everything
is clear. World history is a world court of judgement: A number of
groups of Trotskyite leaders went bankrupt and have beencast
into the pit. That is true. But you cannot do what Feuchtwanger
does in relation to Trotsky in particular, when he places him on
the same plane as Stalin. Here his arguments are absolutely false.
For in reality the whole country stands behind Stalin; he is the
hope of the world; he is a creator. Napoleon once said that fate
is politics. The fate of Trotsky is counter-revolutionary politics.
I am about to finish. I am perhaps speaking for the last time
in my life.
I am explaining how I came to realize the necessity of capitulating to the investigating authorities and to you, Citizens judges.
We came out against the joy of the new life with the most criminal
methods of struggle. I refute the accusation of having plotted against
the life of Vladimir Ilyich, but my counter-revolutionary confederates, and I at their head, endeavoured to murder Lenin'scause, which
is being carried on withsuchtremendoussuccess by Stalin. The logic
of this struggle led us step by step into the blackest quagmire.
And it has once more been proved that departure from the position
of Bolshevism means siding with political counter-revolutionary
banditry. Counter-revolutionary banditry has now been smashed,
we have been smashed, and we repent our frightful crimes.
The point, of course, is not this repentance, or my personal·
repentance in particular. The Courteau pass its verdict without it.
The confession of the accused is not essential. The confession of the
accused is a medieval principle of jurisprudence. But here we also
have the internal demolition of the forces of counter-revolution.
And one must be a Trotsky not to lay down one's arms.
I feel it my duty to say here that in the parallelogram of forces
which went to make up the counter-revolutionary tactics, Trotsky
was the principal motive force. And the most acute methods-ter~
r.orism, espionage, the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R. and wrecking-proceeded primarily from this source.
I may infer a priori that Trotsky and my other allies in crime,
7.78,

as well as the Second International, all the more since I discussed
this with Nikolayevsky, will endeavour to defend us, especially
and particularly myself. I reject this defence, because I am
kneeling before the country, before the Party, before the
whole people. The monstrousness of my crimes is immeasurable
especially in the new stage of the struggle of the U.S.S.R. May
this trial be the last severe lesson, and may the great might of the
U.S.S.R. become clear to all. Let it be clear to all that the counterrevolutionary thesis of the national limitedness of the U.S.S.R.
has remained suspended in the air like a wretched rag. Everybody
perceives the wise leadership of the country that is ensured by
Stalin.
It is intheconsciousnessof this that I await the verdict. What
matters is not the personal fee Ii ngs of a repentant enemy, but the
flourishing progress of the U.S.S.R. and its international importance.
THE PRESIDENT: The accused Levin will make his last plea.
LEVIN: Citizens judges! In my last plea I want to reaffirm
my gui It once more.
The State Prosecutor has disclosed my entire guilt with exhaustive comprehensiveness and objectivity and has drawn a vivid
picture of the gravity of the crimes I committed. I have always
realized the gravity of these crimes, even during the years when
they were being committed underthe irresistible, as it seemed to me,
pressure of the cruel threats and criminal instructions of Yagoda,
and thereafter right up to recent days. And if as my Counsel said
yesterday the testimony which I gave a few days ago savoured
of epic tranquillity, this tranquillity must not be ascribed to the
fact that I remained calm when I spoke of this, but to the fact that
I, first of the group of doctors to speak, had to give the Court a
detailed, clear and complete picture of the crimes that have been
executed and realized, had to do this in such a way that everyone
would understand; and in order to tell the whole story in a composed manner, in order to overcome the agitation which was so
natural under the circumstances, I had to summon all my strength,
all my self-possession and try to maintain a calm tone. Furthermore, it seemed to me that in the situation in which I now find
myself, I should not speak of my personal emotions, my distress
and my sufferings-this is useless now and this would not have
struck a chord in anyone. These are the two reasons which perhaps
created the impressionabout which the Counsel for Defence spoke
yesterday-an impression of epic tranquillity in my terrible testimony. Of course, there is no tranquillity, there was none, and
there will be none. I always felt the gravity of my crimes, and
I feel it now. But I felt it all especially keenly only in the very last
779

davs in prison, in the short time before the beginning of the trial,
when I first had the opportunity of reading the Indictment, when
for the first time I learnt from this Indictment what I had never
known, had not surmised, could not have surmised, could not have
imagined, when I learnt from this Indictment what a criminal
Yagoda already was in 1932, when I learnt in whose interests I had
been compelled to commit my crimes and onto what criminal path
Yagoda had thrown me.
Sitting here in the dock, listening to all the frightful stories
which have been told here by human beings, listening to stories
of General Seeckt and such like, Trotsky, the Japanese, Germans,
British, Poles, who were supplied with secret information, to whom
our richest regions and republics were being sold in exchange for
some future services, listening to the frightful stories of glass in
butter, the destruction of cattle, the destruction of foodstuffs constituting prime necessities for the population, the preparation of
defeat in the forthcoming war which they themselves were provoking, listening to all this horror and imagining all this to myself
as a sort of satanic orgy, I only here realized into what an abyss
the evil genius Yagoda had precipitated me, what forces he had
made me serve, for what and with what end he had pushed me from
the straight and honest path of labour which I had been treading
for forty years, and in my sixty-eighth year put me in this disgraceful dock, together with him.
My guilt is very great, Citizens judges. My guilt is such that
punishment must, of course, be very severe, I do not doubt this.
Today or tomorrow you will decide my fate, and perhaps while
deciding this fate you will nevertheless wish to consider that
the crimes committed by me were committed not of my own evil
intent, not of my own personal ambitions, my personal political
views, but were committed exclusively at the evil will and instructions of Yagoda.
I have a medical experience of forty-two years, and in the
course of this time I never committed any crimes whatever, nor
did I ever commit them after 1936 when I was free from the ghastly instructions of Yagoda. I am not saying this in order to hide behind Yagoda's back. There would be no point in that~ But, Citizens judges, I long to tell you, and to tell the country through
the walls of this building, that if there had been no Yagoda, I would
never have been a criminal. To the end of my life I would have
remained the devoted and honest man which I have been all the
forty-two years of my working life. I absolutely must emphasize
this. I must say once more that I committed my crimes not because
of criminal convictions or designs on my part, but because of
Yagoda 's demands with which he beset me and which I thought
had to be obeyed.
780

From the very beginning of the October Revolution I joined in
the work and did a great deal, a very great deal of strenuous work
in the sphere of Soviet health protection. Both before and after
the revolution I did a lot of work in hospitals; I worked, took part
in the scientific public life of Moscow. I was one of the oldest members of the therapeutical society. I was on the boards of directors
of two m~dical societies, I was a charter member of the Society
of All-Union Congresses, I was a member of the organizational
bureau of two or three congresses, one international congress, and
so on and so forth. I read papers and took part in conferences, in
short, while I did a great deal of practical work I was not in arrears
with scientific and public life. And, of course, the savage, absolutely absurd, ghastly thought of causing even the slightest harm
to any of the leaders of the Party and the government, the majority of whom I had the fortune of knowing personally, could never
have occurred to me perrnnally, of my own volition, on the background of this work of mine which was always enormous. Never
could the savage, ghastly thought have entered my head of causing
any harm to, let alone the death of, Alexei Maximovich Gorky,
of whom I was ardently fond, as everyone knows, with whom
I was closely associated, whom I estimated highly as one of the
greatest writers of our country and of the whole world.
THE PRESIDENT: Cannot you refrain from blaspheming in
your last plea?
LEVIN: Pardon me. In his speech yesterday my counsel advanced arguments on the basis of which he considered it possible
to ask the Court to accord me clemency, to spare me my life. At
this moment one can tell only the truth. And I would be telling
an untruth if I would say that now, at this moment, I look death
in the face easily and calmly. Death is easy for a political fighter
who dies for his ideas, who goes to the block, to the guillotine, with
his head proudly up. But it is, of cour?e, hard to die a disgraceful
death. And I wi 11 not conceal from you. Citizens judges, that the
thought of death is, of course, hard for me. As I have already said,
I am sixty-eight years of age. In any case I have not long to live,
and if you find it possible to agree with the arguments of my counsel and with what I have said here, perhaps you will give me the
opportunity of devoting what still remains of my life to my country
and of expiating at least a part of my crimes by honest work, of
living out what is left of my life honestly, and of ending this life
in my good, working, Sovie~ family. Of the. crimes I comi;riitted,
I repent, painfully repent, bitterly repent, sincerely and with ~y
whole heart. Admitting all my guilt, with my heart filled with
repentance before you, I ask you to grant me my life.
THE PRESIDENT: Adjournment for twenty minutes.

*

*
781

*

COMM.ANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please
rise.
· THE PRES ID ENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed.
Accused Bulanov you may make your last plea.
BULANOV: Citizens judges, I will not speak of the crimes
I have committed because they are known and proven to the full,
if, of course, there is any need to prove the facts, because my
crimes are stark facts, demanding at the best mere registration,
and not proof of any kind .
. There are no excuses in my case, no circumstances mitigating
my crime. My crimes are too great.
Before I met Yagoda I was neither a Right nor a Trotskyite.
Yagoda made me both a Right and a Trotskyite, in short, an enemy
of the people. I have no lengthy experience of duplicity and deceit. T!Jat is why when I was arrested and later on in Court I simply
related everything that I had done because these were facts.
I heard Bukharin here developing a sort of theory about confession, but, as a matter of fact, it is a very simple thing. Neither I,
.nor Bukharin, nor my other fellow-accused have any excuses whatever,. and there can be no circumstances lessening our gui It, because to add any mitigating circumstances would in effect be
to excuse to some extent the crimes that we committed.
When I heard the testimony of my fellow-accused, the last
pleas of some of the accused, I think, perhaps I am mistaken, that
some of them showed signs of wanting to deceive the. Party even
now, although each of them invariably began by saying that he
fully and entirely shares responsibility, pleads guilty and is
·answerable. But this was a matter of form, general declarations.
In a number of cases they tried to deny their guilt by pleading
ignorance of some point. It is not for.me, of course, to aggravate the
severity of the charge against my fellow-accused, but I think that
since I landed here in the dock as an enemy of the people because
of these leaders, I have the right here to declare that some of them
in my opinion have taken a course of continuing the struggle
against·the Soviet power-a course of provocation. I am used to
calling things by their proper names, just as they are.
Two or three days after my arrest, during the preliminary investgati on, and at a confrontation, Yagoda quite brazenly persisted
in.denying a number of circumstances. Facts can be denied for
five or ten minutes, for a day, for two days, but it is folly.
Here at the Court session he denied any complicity whatsoever
in two murders. He is the organizer of all the murders I know. What
do we find-Bukharin knew nothing, Rykov knew nothing, Yagoda
knew nothing. So it was Bulanov that poisoned Nikolai Jvanovich
Yezhov? So Gorky was murdered by Kryuchkov and Levin, so
Kuibyshev was murdered by Levin, so Menzhinsky was murdered
'.782

by Kazakov and Levin? And Bukharin, Rykov, Yagoda had nothing to do with it?
But now I think, the countenance of these so-called leaders is
perfectly clear not only to you Citizens judges but to usalso. Itis
too late, but I. must say this. I think it will not sound so grotesque
and false commg from me, so blasphemous, as it did from Rosengoltz, if I say that the Russian worker, the Russian collective
farmer are fortunate that Nikolai Ivanovich Yezhovcaught us in time
and put us in the dock in time. If these men and I among them,
could not have actually let the enemy in, they could in any case
have created conditions for the German and Japanese hordes to
invade the territory of the U.S.S.R. with the greatest ease, with
all the ensuing consequences.
I imagine, if we suppose for a minute that a conspiracy of such
men, such "leaders.'·' who are not ashamed here in the dock, who
do not hesitate, to drown their own accomplice-the cog in the
wheel (Bukharin says he is a leader, not a cog in the wheel, and
I am not a leader but a cog in the wheel), who are not ashamed to
sell him body and soul in order to get clear themselves even for
the thousandth part of a second-what it would be if these leaders
had really managed to crash through to power, because the logic
of the.struggle, which Bukharin denied, this logic in my opinion,
in plain words, is the logic of struggle for power. They had a shop
.on the signboard of which there were the Rights, Trotskyites,
Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, but they had one and
the same assortment of goods: murder, espionage, acts of diversion,
treachery in all its forms.
If they had actually crashed through to power I think that Hitler,
whom Yagoda considers his model, would soon have been green
withenvy. ForBukharin'sbenefit I confirm and repeat that Yagoda
told me that Bukharin would be Yagoda 's minister of propaganda?
and I answer. for my words. We know how Hitler dealt with people
who did not please him. So I would .not have been surprised if
under Yagoda, Chairman of the Council of People>s Commissars.
you Bukharin, the first minister of agitation and propaganda,
would turn out to be the first chicken in Yagoda 's path.
Citizens judges, my crimes are grave, and, I repeat, I have no
excuse. Grave in particular are my personal crimes against Nikolai
, Ivanovich Yezhov. I would like my last word, apparently the
last in the literal sense, to i:each him somehow. I would like to ask
Yezhov to forgive me, ask him not as one of the leaders of the Party
and Commissar-General of State Security but ask him for this as
an individual.
You, of course, are not and cannot be concerned in the slightest
with my personal emotions, but here too Iaskyou to believe thatit
is particularly hard for me to quit life in the knowledge that I am

783

dying in art unrighteous cause, that I am quitting life because of
these people whose countenance is plain to the whole world and
although unfortunately too late, has become plain to me also.
THE PRESIDENT: The accused Yagoda may mc.ke his last plea.
YAGODA: Citizens Judges, I want to tell the Soviet Court and
the Soviet people how a man who spent thirty years in the Party
and worked a great deal, stumbled, fell and landed in the ranks
of spies and provocateurs.
The Procurator is not right when he says that I have never
been a Bolshevik. I would not dwell on the details of my life if
he had not made this remark.
Here is my life in two words: From the age of 14 I worked as
a compositor in an underground printing press. This was the first
underground printing press in Nizhni-Novgorod. We were three
brothers. One was killed at Sormovo during an insurrection, the
other was shot for taking part in a mutiny of a regiment during
the war. I can only envy their death. At the age of 15 I was
in a fighting squad during the Sormovo insurrection. At the age of
16 or 17 I joined the Party, the Nizhni-Novgorod organization
knowsthis. In1911 Iwasarrestedandsent into exile. In 1913-14
l returned to Leningrad. I worked at the Putilov Works in the sick
benefit society on insurance together with Krestinsky. Then
I went to the front, where I was wounded. The Revolution of
1917 found me in Leningrad, where I was taking an active part,
was a member of the military organization, and wa.s setting up Red
Guard detachments. In 1918-the Southern and Eastern fronts,
in 1919-the Cheka.
Irrespective of how grave my crimes against the people, against
the Party, I nevertheless have the temerity to say that even in the
years when I was a member of the counter-revolutionary organization
I was tortured by my duality. And it isclearwhy. For me, the former
leader of the Soviet intelligence service, having my finger on the
pulse of the whole country, the utter futility, the utter hopelessness
of any attempts on our part to overthrow the Soviet power was c tearer
than to any of the prisoners here in the dock. I knew better than
all of them that the Soviet people in its many millions would never
allow anyone to put the yoke of capitalism on its neck. I knew
better than anyone that no intervention, from whatever quarter it
came, could break the urge of the Soviet people towards Communism. I, as chief of the Soviet intelligence service, knew the enemies
of the Soviet Union very well, I knew the real forces of German
and Japanese fascism. But I also knew the strength of the Soviet
country well. That is just why I could never count on the success
of our counter-revolutionary affairs. That is why I put in the remark about chatterboxes. I lacked the Bolshevik courage to make a
final break with the Rights, with this damned counter-revolution,
784

and to give away the whole thing. Were there such attempts on my
part? Yes, there were, but I never carried them to the end.
I will cite one fact, not to make my lot lighter-for there is
no need of that-but to show the duality in my life. The case with
Yenukidze in 1935. I exposed him, but far from completely. I
should have arrested him; I did not do this because I myself was
a conspirator. I repeat, I have not cited this example in my own
defence nor am I putting it as a merit of mine, but as an illustration
of my duality. There are other facts too; I will not dwell on them.
All this was half-hearted and criminal. I understood and understand
perfectly well what should have been done. Of course, it would
have been best if I had come to the Central Committee and given
myself up with the whole organization. Perhaps the result would
have been different. I have told about my heinous crimes, I shall
not dwe_ll on them a second time.
Disgraced, thrown in the dust, leaving life I want to recount
my sad, tragic career, which should serve as a lesson for all those
who vacillate, who are not wholly devoted to the cause of the Party
of Lenin and Stalin. I also began with waverings. This was in
1929. At that time I made the mistake of thinking that it was
not the Party that was right, but Bukharin and Rykov.
· My fall began from the moment when Rykov, having learnt
of my sympathy for the Rights, told me to conceal my Right views
from the Party. And I agreed to this. I became a double-dealer. My
duality began. Unfortunately, I lacked the Bolshevik courage to
stand up against the masters of duplicity.
This crime of mine affected all my subsequent life and work.
I became two men. One was Yagoda-the Party member, in
daily contact with the greatest people of our era, and the other
Yagoda was a traitor to his country, a conspirator. The first Yagoda
saw the gigantic growth of the country, its flourishing under the
leadership of the Stalinist Central Committee; he also saw the
utter loathsomeness and filth of the Right-Trotskyite underworld, and the second Yagoda was chained to this very underworld as a convict to his wheelbarrow, committing those monstrous
crimes which have been analysed here with all clarity.
This is what just one attempt to go against the Party leads to.
This iswhere peoplewhoraise their hands against thePartyget to.
·
This is life, this is the logic of a fall.
1· want to correct the Procurator and make an objection on a
part of the charges which he has made. They mean nothingin
so far as the decision of my fate is concerned, but the Procurator
is not right in considering me a member of the centre of the bloc.
I am not a member of the centre of the bloc. For me it is important
personally perhaps that 1 did not take part in the decisions of the
bloc. I did not take part in this and I did not take part in the de50

785

cisions on terrorist acts. I was informed post factum and told to
carry out the decisions. In all cases they were made without me.
This does not lessen my gui It, but the bloc consisted of definite persons· these persons passed the decisions. Rykov was a member of
the ~entre of the bloc, he made decisions.
A second point-the Procurator announced it proved beyond
doubt that I was a spy. This is not true. I am not a spy
and have not been one. I think that in the definition of a spy
or espionage we wi 11 not differ. But a fact is a fact. I had no
directconnectionswithabroad, there are no instances of my directly
handing over any information. I am not jesting when I say that if
I had been a spy dozens of countries could have closed down their
intelligence services-there would have been no need for them
to mcintain such a mass of spies as have now been caught in the
Soviet Union.
It is not only untrue to say that I was an organizer but it is
untrue to say that I was an accomplice in the murder of Kirov.
I committed an extremely grave violation of duty-that is right.
I answer for it in an equal measure, but I was not an accomplice.
Citizen Procurator, you know what complicity is just as well as
I do. The entire material of the Court proceedings and the
preliminary investigation has failed to prove that I was an accomplice in this vi le murder.
.My objections on these points are not an attempt to belittle the
significance of my crimes. My defence would have no practical meani ng here, because for each millionth part of my crimes, as the Procurator says, he wants my head. I staked my head and I surrender
it, but I want to reduce my enormous debt to the Procurator. I know
what my sentence will be, I have been awaiting it for a whole year.
In the last hours or days of my life I do not want to play the hypocrite and say that I want to die. This is not true. I have committed
heinous crimes. I realize this. It is hard to live after such crimes,
it is hard to sit in prison for tens of years. But it is terrible to die
with such a stigma. Even from behind the bars I would like to see
the further flourishing of the country which I betrayed.
Citizens judges! I directed vast construction jobs-the canals.
Now these canals are the adornments of our era. I do not dare to ask
to be sent there even for the most arduous work. Citizens judges! Our
laws and our Court differ greatly from the laws and the courts of all
bourgeois countries. I remember how Frick, Minister of Justice in
Germany, declared at a conference of judges: "The laws of fascist
countries are laws of revenge and not of correction.... ,, Our laws
are based on a different principle, our Court is a different court.
The Soviet Court differs from bourgeois courts in the fact that this
Court, when trying a criminal case, does not base itself on
laws as on a dogma, but is guided by revolutionary expediency.

786

Our country is mighty, strong as never before, purged of spies.
diversionists, terrorists and other scum, and I ask you, Citizens
Judges, in passing your sentence on me, to consider whether there
is revolutionary expediency in my execution now? I would not dare
to ask for mercy if I did not know that the present trial is the apotheosis of the defeat of counter-revolution, that the country has
destroyed all the hotbeds of counter-revolution and that the Soviet
country has won, has routed counter-revolution completely. The
fact that I and my fellow-accused are here in the dock and answering for what we have done, is the triumph, the victory of the Soviet
people over counter-revolution. I address myself to the Court with
the plea: forgive me if you can.
THE PRESIDENT: The accused Kryuchkov may make his
last plea.
KRYUCHKOV: Citizens Judges, there are no human words
which I could say in extenuation of my treacherous crime. My
crime against the Soviet people, against young Soviet culture
is great. In admitting my guilt to the full I would like once more
to confirm to the Court that the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites"
through the medium of one of its members, Yagoda, utilized me
for their counter-revolutionary purposes of conspiracy against the
Soviet people, against the proletarian state. Yagoda gave shape
to my criminal thoughts and put them into life, drew me into this
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," I became the murderer of Gorky,
who was so loved by the people and who returned the same great
love to the people, its Party, its leader-the mighty Stalin, as
Gorky often called Stalin. Yagoda knew about this great love of
Gorky's; he also knew how ruthlessly Gorky hated all enemies, and
particularly as Gorky expressed it, the self-satisfied animal Trotsky
and all of his ilk-the Bukharinites, Zinovievites, Kamenevites
and Rykovi tes
"The bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" feared the prestige of
Gorky, and, knowing to a certainty that he would fight to the end
of his days against conspirators and their criminal plans, decided
to murder Gorky. Yagoda, not stopping at threats, made me the
direct perpetrator of this crime. I ask the Court to believe me when
I say that it was not only my personal motives, which were int~r­
woven with the political background of this terrible affair,
that were decisive in this crime. I sincerely repent. I suffer burning shame, particularly here in C~urt when I learnt of and ur:derstood the entire counter-revolutionary baseness of the crimes
of the ~ang of Rights and Trotskyites, in which I was a hired assassin. I ask you, Citizens Judges, for a lenient sentence.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Pletnev.
PLETNEV: Citizens judges, everything has been said and I
wi II be brief. I stand before you as a man who repented of his crim50*

787

inal activities. I am an old scientist. I have worked all my life
until recently. My best works belong to the period of Soviet medicine, and when they appeared in West European literature they
served to prove the fact that the old-time scientists, despite their not
infrequent anti-Soviet tendencies, had been given the opportunity
to display their creative faculties. And here in custody I requested
the leadership of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs
to give me books, and over twenty books of my own choice in four
languages were brought from my library. In this period I managed
to write in prison a monograph ten or twelve signatures long. I say
this to explain that here I have been given trust and opportunity
and I want to hope that by this I have also shown that l want to
work and can work, because to work in these conditions, with such
a state of nerves, is not so simple as to work at home. I ask you to
take into consideration that if I had not met one of the persons
sitting here, about whom the Counsel for Defence recently spoke,
and who threatened me, blackmailed me with death, all the subsequent deeds could not have taken place. I became acquainted with
the deeds of the bloc only from the Indictment and during the
progress of the trial, and I think this gives me the right to
believe that I cannot shareitsresponsibility fully. If the Court finds
it possible to grant me my life, I will devote it wholly and
entirely to my Soviet country, the only country in the world
where labour in all its fields is given a place of honour and glory
such as it has nowhere else and has never had before.
THE PRESIDENT: The accused Kazakov may make his
last plea.
KAZAKOV: Citizens Judges, I stand before you as the worst
of criminals, as the murderer of the Chairman of the O.G.P.U.,
Vyacheslav Rudolfovich Menzhinsky.
It is hard for me to talk of my crime, because as a physician
my calling is naturally to cure people, to restore their health. I
blackened the calling of physician and trampled on the most
valuable thing-the bond between patient and physician, the
confidence owing to which the patient fully entrusts his health,
his very life to the physician.
I became a murderer, because as a result of wrong treatment I,
together with Dr. Levin, hastened Menzhinsky's death. Atthe present moment I shudder picturing to myself the entire gravity of
the crime which I committed, the more so that Menzhinsky had
full confidence in me as a physician.
I came to commit this crime as a result of direct personal in..
structions on the part of Yagoda as the first assistant chairman of
the 0.G.P.U. who intimidated me with threats, and, as a result,
I carried out his will and committed this appalling crime.
I am asking myself: could I not at that time deceive Yagoda
788

and pretend that I was carrying out his instructions for bringing
about Me:izhi nsky's death? Ostensibly I could have done so, because I wielded a method of treatment which at that time was not
sufficiently :Vi.despread and known. But Citizens Judges, it was
more than difficult to do-I might say, it was impossible, because
I was under control, control exercised by Dr. Levin, the direct
executorofthecrime, of Yagoda'scriminal will. I was bent with the
fear which Yagoda instilled in me by his threats and constant survei Hance, in addition-the exhaustion of the reserve of strength of
Menzhinsky' heart and the death which was bound to follow owing
to the methods of treatment which Levin and I applied. Levin
exercised the main control over me.
Now, when I stand before you, Citizens judges, as the murderer
of Menzhinsky, I cannot help shuddering and being overcome with
horror when I think of the despicable crime into which I was
dragged. Not for a minute do I want to disclaim the blame for this
crime. On the contrary I want to repent of this crime to the end
and rid myself of this nightmare.
But I ·cannot escape a feeling of hatred, of repugnance which
I entertain for Yagoda. I curse this man-this monster, this tyrant, who by means of threats and intimidation, by basely taking
advantage of my cowardice, by taking advantage of the high po~ition he occupied, for monstrously vicious purposes, tore me away
from the orbit of the honest scientific activity of an honest
worker and physician, dragged me into a crime of immeasurable
gravity, made a criminal of me in the great land of Soviets where
the work of a physician is raised to such a high honourable
position, where the government accorded me and my scentific
activity exceptional attention and solicitude.
I must say here that all my life, before this crime and during
the four years following it, I honestly and consistently carried on
scientific clinical work, desiring to bring some little benefit to
the land of the Soviets and its working people. I showed a sincere
and careful attitude to every patient, trying to the utmost to restore his health.
Four years weigh heavily on me with the nightmare of the crimes
which I committed, and by this sincere repentance I want to rid
myself of this nightmare. I ask the Court to believe the depth and
sincerity of my repentance. I never thought that I would become
a criminal. I always strove only to engage in scientific work from
which I have now been torn away owing to this nightmare. Four
years of this nightmare weigh heavily on me. I tried t.o rid myself of this nightmare by work. During the four years which passed
<tfter this ghastly crime, I made about forty scientific researches.
But this did not rid me of its weight, it brought me no comfort,
it gave me no joy.

789

I deserve the severest punishment and, if the Court wi 11 so decide, I shall accept this decision as deserved. But should I be given the opportunity to work, I wi 11 in the course of my further
life do everything to wash off this shame which covers me and to
atone for my crime by honest and persistent labour, by giving all
my strength and all my knowledge to our great country.
THE PRESIDENT: The accused Maximov-Dikovsky may
make his last plea.
MAXIMOV-DIKOVSKY: Citizens Judges, when I testified in
the Court I was guided by only one consideration: to repent, to
tell everything and to accept my deserved punishment.
It was not at once that I entered on the path -of crime. I do not
belong to those who started to fight the Party from the very beginning of their Party activity. I do not belong to those who joined the
Party, carrying with them the load of alien political views. Since
1919, at the age of 18. I firmly entered the road of struggle for the
consolidation and defence of the Soviet power. I arrested Whiteguards, I was imprisoned by the Whites, I was in the Red Army
and fought at the fronts. I carried on Party work after the demobilization and for three years I conducted mass Party work in a factory.
Those nine years were the years when, under the leadership
of the Central Committee, I fought selflessly for the interests of
the Party, for the interests of the country, and only later, when
I got mixed up with the Rights, I betrayed the interests of the
Party, I betrayed the interests of my country. I became just as much
a criminal as those who persuaded me to commit this crime.
In the criminal environment of the Right conspirators I sank
so low that on the demand of the centre (and the instructions
of the centre were quite concrete) I became an accomplice in the
organization of one of the terrorist acts. I committed a
grave crime, I inflicted great harm on the Party and the country.
The crime which I committed was for me the limit beyond which
I did not go. Since 1935 I severed organizational connections with
the conspirators and during .the last few years have had nothing
in common with them, which fact is fully corroborated by the
materials of the investigation.
However, since I lacked courage to expose their crimes, to expose myself, I thereby covered up these crimes, and, consequently,
objectively continued on the enemy positions. When I was arrested, I immediately confessed and did not deny anything even
for a day. I had nothing in common with these old, alien connections. Neither did I have anything in common with them in connection with the practical work which I carried on during the last
years in the sphere of railway transport where I had the opportunity to see with my own eyes how great are the successes of the
land of the Soviets which no conspirators can turn from its path.

7.90;

I gave testimony about all the counter-revolutionary work 6f which
I knew, I fully disarmed myself, without holding back any secrets
and without assuming any disguise. The more reason why the
casuistic somersaults of Bukharin during the trial appeared
alien to me.
Much of what I learnt during the trial, I had not known before. This is comprehensible, considering the role I played among
the conspirators. I could not and was not supposed to know everything. But this does not lessen my gui It because even what I
knew and, primarily, the fact that I committed a grave crime are
sufficient for me to be tried as a state offender.
At the same time I want to say that the trial has shown with utter
clarity what was meant by the so-called restoration of capitalism.
The trial showed me that it meant such dismemberment of the
country when it would be reduced to semi-colonial dependence on
fascist states.
Had these criminal designs been consummated the country
would have been drenched in the blood of scoresofthousandsofits
best sons, more cruelly than it was done by Deni kin and Wrangel.
It would have meant that the country would have been thrown back
scores of years in its development, it would have meant that the
international struggle of the proletariat would have also been impeded.
I want to say that the trial showed me quite clearly that Hitler, Trotsky and Bukharin are as one in their frenzied struggle
against our country. In the light of thepictureofthecrimeswhich
was unfolded here in Court I cannot but add my voice to the estimation which was given here by the State Prosecutor: a gang of
trait.ors and spies, of diversionists and betrayers, provocateurs and
murderers. These are grave, sinister words, but the criminal deeds
committed by us are even more grave, the people who committed
these deeds are even more despicable. And how can I refrain from
calling these crimes by their proper names if I want to repent fully,
·without in any way minimizing my guilt, without exonerating
myselfinanything. I declare here firmly: "Forseveral years I was
in the camp of the enemies, but I am no longer an enemy. I ask
you to believe me that I am not incorrigible and that should I
be given the opportunity to work I should be abletoproveinany
sphere, in any kind of work, that I would not remain in the rear.
THE PRESIDENT: The Court retires for deliberation.
(At 9:25 p.m. on March 12, the Military Collegium of the
Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. retired to the conference room
to deliberate on the verdict. Deliberation was completed at
4 a.m. on tv1arch 13.)

*

*
791

.

*

COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming,
please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: The session is resumed. I will announce
the verdict of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of
the U.S.S.R.
THE VERDICT
In the name of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics the
Military Collegium of the Supr(;!me Court of the U.S.S.R., consisting of:
PRESIDENT: Army Military jurist, V. V. Ulrich, President
of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.;
MEMBERS: Army Corps Military jurist, I. 0. Matulevich,
Vice-President of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court
of the U.S.S.R., and Divisional Military Jurist, B. I. Yevlev,
Member of the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the
U.S.S.R.;
SECRETARY: Military jurist First Rank A. A. Batner,
with the participation of the State Prosecutor, A. Y. Vyshinsky,
Procurator of the U.S.S.R., and I. D. Braude and N. V. Kornmodov, Members of the Moscow Collegium of Counsel for Defence,
in an open Court session, in the City of Moscow, on March 2-13,
1938, heard the case against:
1. BUKHARIN, Nikolai I vanovich, born 1888;
2. RYKOV, Alexei Ivanovich, born 1881;
3. YAGO DA, Genrikh Grigorievich, born 1891;
4. KRESTINSKY, Nikolai Nikolayevich, born 1883;
5. RAKOVSKY, Khristian Georgievich, born 1873;
6. ROSENGOLTZ, Arkady Pavlovich, born 1889;
7. IVANOV, Vladimir Ivanovich, born 1893;
8. CHERNOV, Mikhail Alexandrovich, born 1891;
9. GRINKO, Grigori Fedorovich, born 1890;
10. ZELENSKY, Isaac Abramovich, born 1890;
11. BESSONOV, Sergei Alexeyevich, born 1892;
12. IKRAMOV, Akmal, born 1898;
13. KHOO JAYEV, Faizulla, born 1896;
14. SHARANGOVICH, Vasily Fomich, born 1897;
15. ZUBAREV, Prokopy Tirnofeyevich, born 1886;
16. BULANOV, Pavel Petrovich, born 18~5;
17. LEVIN, Lev Grigorievich, born 1870;
18. PLETNEV, Dmitry Dmitrievich, born 1872;
19. KAZAKOV, Ignaty Nikolayevich, born 1891·
20. MAXIMOV-DIKOVSKY, Venyamin Adamovich (Abramovich), born 1900, and

.

792

21. KRYUCHKOV, Pyotr Petrovich, born 1889-all charged
with havin~ committed crimes covered by Articles 581a, 582 ,
58 7, 588 , 58 9 and 5811 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.,
and Ivanov, Zelensky and Zubarev, in addition, with having com-_
mitted crimes covered by Article 5813 of the Criminal Code of the
R.S.F.S.R.

The preliminary and Court investigations have established:
The accused Bukharin, Rykov, Yagoda, Krestinsky, Rosengoltz, Grinko, Sharangovich, Khodjayev, Ikramov, Ivanov.
Zubarev, Zelensky and Chernov, being irreconcilable enemies of
the Soviet power, on the instructions of the intelligence services
of foreign states hostile to the U.S.S.R., in 1932-33 organized a
conspiratorial group known as the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," which united underground anti-Soviet groups of Trotskyites,
Rights, Zinovievites, Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and
bourgeois-nationalists of the Ukraine, Byelorussia, Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan and the Central Asiatic Republics.
The "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" set itself the aim of
overthrowing the Socialist social and state system existing in the
U.S.S.R., restoring capitalism and the power of the bourgeoisie
in the U.S.S.R. by means of diversive, wrecking, terrorist, espionage and treasonable activities directed to undermine the economic
might and defensive power of the Soviet Union and to assist
foreign aggressors in defeating and dismembering the U.S.S.R.
Bereft of all support within the U .S.S. R., the leaders of the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," with the object of carrying out
their criminal designs, concluded through enemy of the people
L. Trotsky and through individual participants in the anti-Soviet
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," an agreement with representatives of certain foreign states on armed assistance in overthrowing the Soviet power in the U.S.S.R., on condition of its dismemberment and the severance from the U.S.S. R. of the Ukraine,
Byelorussia, the Maritime Region, and the Central Asiatic and
Transcaucasian Republics for the benefit of the aforementioned
foreign states.
The conclusion of this treasonable agreement of the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites" with representatives of foreign states
was facilitated by the fact that leading participants in the antiSoviet conspiracy were direct agents of foreign intelligence services
and for many years carried on espionage ac.tivities for these
intelligence services.
Krestinsky, on the direct instructions of enemy of the people L. Trotsky, agent of the German and British intelligence
services, entered into treasonable connections with the German
Reichswehr in 1921 and was a German spy until the day of his
arrest in 1937, receiving in return for his espionage work and for
793

the use of the criminal activities of the Trotskyite organization
250,000 German gold marks per annum.
Rosengoltz beaan espionage work for the German General Staff
in 1923 and for the British Intelligence Service in 1926.
Rakovsky was an agent of the British Intelligence Service
since 1924 and a Japanese spy since 1934.
Chernov began his espionage work for Germany in 1928,
having fo~med connectio_ns with the. Germa~ ir:ite!ligence service
with the aid of the notorious Menshev1k and em1gre, Dan.
Sharangovich was recruited and sent by the Polish intelligence
service to carry on espionage work in the U.S.S.R. in 1921 and
was a Polish spy to the day of his arrest.
Grinko was a German and Polish spy since 1932.
On the instructions of enemy of the people L. Trotsky,
and of leading participants in the "bloc of Rights and Trntskyites "-Bukharin, Rykov and Yagoda-members of the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites," Rosengoltz, Krestinsky, Rakovsky,
Grinko, and Bessonov, with obviously treasonable purposes, entered into direct relations with representatives of foreign states
hostile to the U.S.S.R. and negotiated with them regarding the
forms of assistance to be given to foreign aggressors in the event
of their attack upon the Soviet Union (organization of terrorist,
diversive and wrecking acts and espionage).
The leaders of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," Rykov,
Bukharin and Yagoda among their number, were not only fully
informed of the espionage activities of their accomplices, but in
every way encouraged the extension of espionage connections,
and themselves gave instructions to the participants in the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites" when they conducted their treasonable
negotiations with representatives of foreign states, thus expediting preparations for foreign intervention.
On the direct instructions of foreign intelligence services, the
participants in the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" organized
diversive and wrecking groups in a number of industrial,
transport, agricultural and trading enterprises and carried on
destructive activities, their purpose being to paralyse the economic life of the country and to weaken the defensive power of the
Soviet Union.
On the instructions of the Japanese intelligence service, participants in the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites ,, organized in the
Far Eastern Territory the wrecking of a train carrying military
material at the Volochayevka Station and of train No. 501 on the
Khor-Dormidontovka section, and also committed several diversive
acts in the Suchan mines. All these diversive acts were accompanied by loss of human life.
Rosengoltz, on the directions of enemy of the people L. Trot794

sky, and on the basis of an agreement with representatives· of
foreign states, carried on wrecking work within the People's Commissariat of Foreign Trade designed to .assist Germany and japan
and accompanied by economic damage to the U.S.S. R. In addition,
Rosengoltz systematically financed Trotsky by means of various
foreign exchange operations.
Chernov, on the instructions of the German inte1ligence service
and the orders of Rykov, took advantage of his important official
position in the agricultural organs of the U.S.S. R. for the purpose
of organizing, through his confederates, a number of major diversive and wrecking acts designed to lower the harvest yield of agricultural crops, damage mobilization reserves of agricultural
produce and reduce the number of horses and cattle, in
particular, by artificially spreading epizootic diseases, as a result
of which about 25,000 horses perished in 1936 in Eastern
Siberia alone.
Grinko, on the instructions of the leaders of the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites'' and of the German intelligence service,
systematically carried on extensive wrecking activities in the
system of the People's Commissariat of Finance, with the object
of causing dissatisfaction among the population and thereby
making it easier to recruit his followers. This found expression in
delays in payment of wages, bad service by the savings banks to
the population, the unlawful levying of certain taxes on the
peasants, and other wrecking measures.
Sharangovich, one of the leaders of the Byelorussian nationalfascist organization, on the instructions of the organs of the Polish
intelligence service and of leaders of the "bloc of Rights and
Trotskyites' '-Rykov and others-organized on a large scale
diversive and wrecking activities in agriculture, stockbreeding
and industry in Byelorussia, thereby facilitating the task of
aggressors if they launched an armed attack on the Byelorussian
Soviet Socialist Republic.
Ikramov and Khodjayev, on the instructions of Bukharin,
developed extensive diversive and wrecking activities in the
various branches of the national economy of Uzbekistan with the
object of causing discontent among the population and thus
creating favourable conditions for the preparation of armed
actions against the Soviet power at the time of foreign intervention.
Zelensky organized wrecking groups in the Centrosoyuz and
in the consumers' co-operatives, and with the help of these groups,
with the object of causing discontent among the population,
muddled the planning of goods, delayed their dispatch to the rural
~istricts, caused damage to and decay of foodstuffs, mixed glass
795

and nails into foodstuffs, and deliberately disorganized the supply
of consumers' goods to the primary co-operative stores.
Ivanov, on the instructions of Bukharin, carried on wrecking
and diversive activities in forestry and the timber industry of the
Northern Territory.
Zubarev, an active participant in the underground organization
of the Rights, on the instructions of Rykov carried on wrecking
activities in agriculture in a number of regions of the R.S. F.S. R.
In addition to intensive diversive and wrecking activities, the
participants in the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, '' on the
instructions of the German, Japanese and Polish intelligence
services, under the direct guidance of Rykov and Bukharin and
with the active participation of Ivanov, Khodjayev, Ikramov,
Zubarev, Sharangovich, Grinko and Zelensky, mustered bandit
insurrectionary kulak cadres in Siberia, the North Caucasus, the
Ukraine, Byelorussia, Uzbekistan and a number of other parts
of the Soviet Union for the purpose of organizing armed actions
in the rear of the Red Army, timed for the beginning of intervention against the Soviet Union.
In order to extend the bandit insurrectionary ku1ak base, and
in accordance with a decision of the leaders of the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites," Bukharin established organizational connections with the undergound Central Committee of the SocialistRevolutionary organization then active !n the U.S.S.R., as well as
with the Central Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
abroad.
In accordance with a direct agreement with foreign intelligence
services, and on the instructions of enemy of the people L. Trotsky,
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" organized a number of terrorist acts against the leaders of the C.P.S.U.(Bolsheviks) and the
Soviet government.
In 1934, Rykov, one of the leading participants in the "bloc
of Rights and Trotskyites, '' personally formed a terrorist group
for the preparation and commission of terrorist acts against Comrades Stalin, Molotov, Kaganovich and Voroshilov.
In August 1937, Rosengoltz personally attempted to commit
a terrorist act against Comrade Stalin, for which purpose he repeatedly tried to secure an interview with him.
As the preliminary investigation and the Court proceedings
in the present case have established, the dastardly assassination
of S. M. Kirov on December 1, 1934, by the Leningrad TrotskyiteZinovievite terrorist centre was organized in accordance with a
decision of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." A direct part
in the organization of this terrorist act was taken by the accused
Yagoda, who gave special instructions to his accomplices working
in the Leningrad Administration of the People's Commissariat

796

of Internal Affairs not to hinder the perpetration of this crime.
On the instructions of enemy of the people L. Trotsky, the
leaders of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" in 1934 adopted
a decision to assassinate the great proletarian writer, Maxim
Gorky. The organization of this monstrous terrorist act was entrusted to Yagoda, who initiated Dr. Levin, M. Gorky's family
doctor, and the physician P!etnev into the purposes of the conspiracy and instructed them to bring about the death of M. Gorky
by wrecking methods of treatment; which was done, Dr. Levin
having played the leading part in this criminal act. An active part
in this villainous deed was taken by Kryuchkov, former secretary
of M. Gorky, and Bulanov, former secretary of the People's Commissariat of Internal Affairs, participants in the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites."
In accordance with a decision of the leaders of the "bloc of
Rights and Trotskyites, '' Yagoda, by means of wrecking methods
of treatment, organized the murder of V. R. Menzhinsky, Chairman of the 0.G.P.U., and of V. V. Kuibyshev, Vice-Chairman
of the Council of People's Commissars of the U.S.S.R. A direct
part in the perpetration of the terrorist act against Comrade Kuibyshev was taken by Levin and Maximov-Dikovsky, former
secretary of Kuibyshev and a participant in the secret organization of the Rights since 1928; while a direct part in the perpetration of the terrorist act against V. R. Menzhinsky was taken by
Bulanov and by the physician Kazakov, who had been enlisted
in the conspiratorial group by Yagoda and LevinI t has further been established that Levin and Kryuchkov,
on the direct instructions of Yagoda, caused the death of
M. A. Peshkov, the son of A. M. Gorky, by means of wrecking
methods of treatment.
In connection with the appointment in September 1936 of
Comrade N. I. Yezhov to the post of People's Commissar of Internal Affairs of the U.S.S.R., the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites,"
fearing the complete exposure and rout of the anti-Soviet cadres,
instructed Yagoda to commit a terrorist act against Comrade
N. I. Yezhov.
In pursuance of these dastardly instructions, Yagoda, with the
direct assistance of Bulanov, in the autumn of 1936 made an
attempt upon the life of Comrade N. I. Yezhov, gradually
poisoning him by means of a poison specially prepared for the purpose, as a result of which the health of N. I. Yezhov was seriously impaired.
It has been further established that in accordance with a decision of the anti-Soviet organization of the Rights, Bukharin, as
early as 1930, arranged with Semyonov, a Socialist-Revolutionary
terrorist, organizer of the assassination of Comrade Volodarsky
797

and the attempt on the life of V. I. Lenin in 1918, for the formation by Semyonov of a number of terrorist groups with the
object of preparing and committing terrorist acts against leaders
of the C.P.S.U. and the Soviet government.
It has also been established that in 1918 Bukharin, and the
group of "Left Communists" headed by him, in conjunction with
Trotsky and the "Left'' Socialist-Revolutionaries, hatched a plot
against the Soviet government.
The aim of Bukharin and his fellow-conspirators was to thwart
the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, to overthrow the Soviet government,
to arrest and assassinate V. I. Lenin, J. V. Stalin and j. M. Sverdlov and to form a new government consisting of Bukharinites,
Trotskyites and "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
In executing the plan of the conspiracy, the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries in July 1918, with the knowledge and consent
of Bukharin, raised a revolt in Moscow with the object of
overthrowing the Soviet government; it has been further established
that the attempt on the life of V. I. Lenin committed by the
Socialist-Revolutionary Kaplan on August 30, 1918, was the
direct result of the criminal designs of the "Left Communists,"
headed by Bukharin, and of their confederates, the "Left" and
Right Socialist-Revolutionaries.
The preliminary and Court investigations have established
the fact that Zelensky, Ivanov and Zubarev, accused in the present
case, had already entered the path of struggle against the revolutionary movement of the .working class in the days of tsardom.
Zelensky was an agent-provocateur employed by the Samara
Gendarmerie headquarters from 1911 to 1913.
Ivanov was an agent-provocateur of the Okhrana and the Gendarmerie headquarters in Moscow and other cities from 1911 to 1916.
Zubarev, recruited as an agent-provocateur in the city of Kotelnich in 1908, engaged in provocateur activities until 1917.
Thus, the Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the
U.S.S.R. has established the guilt of (1) N. I. Bukharin,
(2) A. I. Rykov, (3) G. G. Yagoda, (4) N. N. Krestinsky,
(5) K. G. Rakovsky, (6) A. P. Rosengoltz, (7) V. I. Ivanov,
(8) M. A. Chernov, (9) G. F. Grinko, (10) I. A. Zelensky,
(11) S. A. Bessonov, (12) A. Ikramov, (13) F. Khodjayev,
(14) V. F. Sharangovich, (15) P. T. Zubarev, (16) P. P. Bulanov,
(17) L. G. Levin, (18) D. D. Pletnev, (19) I. N. Kazakov,
(20) V. A. Maximov-Dikovsky and (21) P. P. Kryuchkov, in that,
being active participants in a conspiratorial group known as the
"bloc of Rights and Trotskyites, '• which acted under the direct
instructions of the intelligence services of foreign states, they
carried on treasonable, espionage, diversive, wrecking and terrorist activities, provoking an armed attack by these states on the
798

U .S.S. R. with the purpose of bringing about the defeat and dismemberment of the Soviet Union and the severance from it of the
Ukraine, Byelorussia, the Central Asiatic republics, Georgia,
Armenia, Azerbaijan, and the Maritime Region in the Far East
for benefit of foreign states hostile to the'U.S.S.R., their ultimate
aim being the overthrow of the Socialist social and state system
existing in the U.S.S.R. and the restoration of capitalism arid
of rhe power of the bourgeoisie in the U.S.S.R.-i.e., of having
committed extremely grave state offences covered by Articles 581a,
582 , 58 7 , 58 8 , 589 and 5811 of the Criminal Code of the R.S.F.S.R.,
and Ivanov, Zelensky and Zubarev, in addition, of having committed crimes covered by Article 5813 of the Criminal Code of
the R.S.F.S.R.
On the basis of the aforesaid, and guided by Articles 319 and
320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure of the R.S.F.S. R.,

The Military Collegium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
Sentences:
1. BUKHARIN, Nikolai Ivanovich,
2. RYKOV, Alexei Ivanovich,
3. YAGODA, Genrikh Grigorievich,
i. KRESTINSKY, Nikolai Nikolayevich,
5. ROSENGOLTZ, Arkady Pavlovich,
6. IVANOV, Vladimir Ivanovich,
7. CHERNOV, Mikhail Alexandrovich,
8. GRINKO, Grigori Fedorovich,
9. ZELENSKY, Isaac Abramovich,
10. IKRAMOV, Akmal,
11. KHODJAYEV, Faizulla,
12. SHARANGOVICH, Vasily Fomich,
13. ZUBAREV, Prokopy Timofeyevich,
14. BULANOV, Pavel Petrovich,
15. LEVIN, Lev Grigorievich,
16. KAZAKOV, Ignaty Nikolayevich,
17. MAXIMOV-DIKOVSKY, Venyamin Adamovich (Abramovich), and
18. KRYUCHKOV, Pyotr Petrovich
to the supreme penalty-to be shot, with the confiscation of all
their personal property.
19. PLETNEV, Dmitry Dmitrievich, as not having directly
taken an active part in the causing of death of Comrades V. V.
Kuibyshev and A. M. Gorky, although he was an accessory to this
crime-to imprisonment for the term of twenty-five years, with
deprivation of political rights for a period of five years after

799

expiration of his prison term and with the confiscation of
all his personal property.
20. RAKOVSKY, Khristian Georgievich, and
21. BESSONOV, Sergei Alexeyevich,
as not having taken a direct part in the organization of terrorist,
diversive and wrecking activities-to imprisonment: Rakovsky
for the term of twenty years and Bessonov for the term of fifteen
years, each with deprivation of political rights for a period of
five years after expiration of his prison term and with the confiscation of all his personal property.
The terms of imprisonment of Pletnev, Rakovsky and Bessonov
shall be counted from the day of their arrest.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH

PRESIDENT:

Army Military Juris11
President of the Military Collegi,um of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
MEMBERS OF THE COURT:

I. MATULEVICH
Army Corps Military Jurist
Vice-President of the Military Collegi,um
of the Supreme Court of the U.S..S.R.

[Signed]

B. YEVLEV
Divisional Military Jurist
Member of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.

THE !PRESIDENT: I .declare the Court Session of the Military Co11egium of the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R. close.d.
[Signed]

V. ULRICH

PRESIDENT:

Army Military Jurist!
President of the Milit.ary Collegi,um of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY:

A.BATNER

Military Jurist First Rank

