Ezhov interrogation 10.25.39 by Esaulov
Polianskii 285; 286-289.
"Listen", implored Ezhov, "What kind of spy am I? I have a ‘tail’ behind me at all times, my chauffer or a guard. What kind of a resident could I meet with? And no one recruited me in Germany in 1930. I have been lying a lot. And I lied about Slutsky. I did not give Frinovskii the assignment to poison him, and Alekhin and Zakovskii have nothing to do with it. Slutskii died by himself, from his heart. And lied about everything.
You should not lie…
…
In various documents you stated contradictory and untrue information about yourself. The verification has proven this. Did you do this out of espionage and sabotage motives?
Yes. I deliberately distorted my biography. I did this for careerist purposes, to be promoted in the Party.
You thought up another biography for yourself not out of careerist, but out of provocateurist motives, in order to deceive the Party, to insinuate yourself into its leadership, and corrupt it from within by means of sabotage and espionage. Was that so?
Yes. I did this out of sabotage and prevocational motives in order to struggle against the Party.
Now let us move on to an explanation of those facts that you have deliberately distorted. In official documents you lied that you were born in Petrograd. No information about your birth in that city have been found. Where were you born in reality?
...
I only know about the place I was born from my mother’s words, from memories of my early childhood. Mother said that I was born in the city of Mariampol, in the former Suval’sk guberniia of Lithuania. Afterwards I went to Petrograd. By means of the facts about my birth in Petrograd I wanted to portray myself in the guise of a deeply-rooted proletarian and old revolutionary.
Did you also lie when you said your father was a worker?
Yes, I also lied about this for the same reason.
Who was your father in reality?
My father, Ivan Ezhov, from near Tula by birth, was from a peasant family.
Were they well-off?
Yes. He served in the army, in a musical unit, as a senior musician in Mariampol. There he also married the servant girl of a choirmaster.
What did your father do after demobilization?
He was a forester and a switchman on the railroad.
In a prerevolutionary Peterburg handbook an Ivan Ezhov is mentioned who was owner of a saloon. Was that your father?
For a time my father owned a tea house.
We have information that this tea house also served as a front for criminal activities. Is that so?
Yes. It was in reality a house of assignation…
A bordello.
It was a bordello, and my father lived on the proceeds. When they shut down the tea house, he became a painter.
Did he hire other workers?
I don’t deny that in later years father had one or two hired workers and was something like a contractor.
Did you also lie deliberately about working as a mechanic in Petrograd factories?
I did this to pretty up my background. I worked very little as a mechanic, my main work was always the trade of tailor.
And now tell us what your real nationality is.
I have always considered myself a Russian and identify myself as such on official documents. I was born into a Russian peasant family.
Aren’t you concealing your real nationality? After all, your mother was from Lithuania.
In official documents my nationality is recorded more or less correctly.
What does "more or less" mean?
That means that my mother was born in Lithuania and therefore was a Lithuanian by nationality.
In one of your [biographical] forms you wrote that you know both the Lithuanian and the Polish languages. Did your mother teach them to you?
No. My mother and father knew Lithuanian, but never spoke it at home. I served in Vitebsk in the Tsarist army, and there were many Poles and Lithuanians. That’s where I learned a few words and sentences. But I do not know how to speak these languages and wrote on the form that I know them for prevocational purposes.
The investigation possesses information that you know Yiddish. Why do you conceal this?
I do not know Yiddish, if you do not count a few words and expressions that I learned from my acquaintances who were Jews.
And here we have information that you often spoke Yiddish with your wife.
That is some kind of mistake. I cannot speak Yiddish. Even my wife, in my opinion, knew Yiddish poorly and never spoke it with any Jewish people.
_______________________
