Ezhov interrogation 07.08.39 by Rodos
- fm Polianskii 262-268
"Tell us how and when you recruited Uspenskii in the espionage-sabotage organization in the NKVD that you had created.
I turned my attention to Uspenskii already at the beginning of 1936.
That was when he was still the assistant commandant of the Moscow Kremlin for internal security?
Yes.
Where did you find out about Uspenskii’s hostile anti-Soviet views. Did he express them to you himself?
No. Veinshtok and Frinovskii told me about that. They knew him well and believed that he’d be very suitable for espionage work.
Did you recruit Uspenskii personally?
Yes. That was right after my arrival in the Commissariat. He quickly agreed and I told him that we needed our own men in the provinces. That was why I sent him to Western Siberia.
What kinds of assignments did you given him then?
He was supposed to recruit agents into our organization from among the Chekist cadre and to promote them to leading positionis so that they could seize power in the event of war or a coup.
In November 1937 you sent Uspenskii a coded message with the following content: "If you think you are going to sit in Orenburg for five years, you are mistaken. Very soon, it seems, I will have to promote you to a more responsible post. What is the meaning of this message?
At that time the leadership of our organization decided to move to active measures. There was a lot of evidence against Leplevskii and Zakovskii showing that they were spies and enemies of the people. It was impossible to hide such matters, and we had to get rid of these people, we couldn’t use them, they could cause everything to fail. We decided to replace them with Uspenskii and Litvin. I gave Uspenskii a coded message so that he would find out about his forthcoming departure from Orenburg and would switch all the sabotage-espionage work over to other people whom he had been able to recruit there.
OK. And now tell us how you warned Uspenskii about the fact that they wanted to arrest him.
Did Dagin tell you about the fact of Uspenskii's forthcoming arrest?
Yes, I think it was he. He came to my office and told me about that.
And didn’t he tell you that he had listened in on the telephone conversation between comrades Stalin and Khrushchev about Uspenskii?
Yes, I remember that he told me about the telephone conversation about Uspenskii which he had listened in on, but he did not say that that was Stalin’s conversation. Dagin, on my instructions, listened in on all telephone conversations of the Politburo and immediately told me about them so that I would be up to date.
After that you called Kiev and warned Uspenskii. What did you tell him?
I said: ‘You are being recalled, your situation is bad.’ Something like that. I was afraid to send him a coded message, they could intercept it, since I had already lost trust and was under suspicion among the Party [leaders] as a hostile element.
Did Dagin also tell you about the recall of Litvin from Leningrad?
I did not know anything about the recall of Litvin to Moscow and did not warn him. There was no need to do so.
Why was that?
I had an agreement with him that in the event he was exposed he would commit suicide.
Was that your order?
No. In September of that year Litvin was in Moscow and used to come to my dacha. He told me that the arrival of Beria at the NKVD was the beginning of the end and soon we would all be arrested, since the Party was most likely aware about our plot. And he also said that he would not give himself up alive and that if they unexpectedly recalled him to Moscow he would shoot himself. That’s what happened.
Did you support him in this intention?
No. But I didn’t try to dissuade him either.
That means that you admit that you de-facto gave your accomplice an order to commit suicide in the event of failure?
Yes, that was de-facto the case.
When did you include Litvin in your espionage work?
That was in 1931, when I transferred him to Moscow.
Why did he agree to become a spy?
Already in the 1920s when I was getting together with Litvin I noticed his inexplicable relationship to Trotskyism. Openly he was not a supporter of Trotsky, but in his circle at that time there were many exposed Trotskyists and I think that in his inner being he had always been a Trotskyist.
You wish to say that even then Litvin was a double-dealer?
Yes. He was a double-dealer and, as later turned out, was a supporter of the Trotskyist-Zinovievist line. Therefore he willingly agreed to my proposal to become a German spy. I think because at that time the Left opposition had already suffered its final failure and Trotsky had been driven out of the USSR altogether.
In 1933 Litvin upon your recommendation was named the chief of the cadre section of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Ukraine. Was that done on the instruction of German intelligence?
Yes, I received that instruction from Artnau.
What directives about espionage did Litvin receive from you?
These directives were of a subversive and sabotage nature. I asked him to appoint to leading positions people who could by their actions cause arouse the dissatisfaction of the population of the Ukraine, people who would carry out sabotage, ruin foodstuff and livestock, disrupt the fulfillment of industrial plans. These were hidden Right and Left Oppositionist, who also carried out assignments for Zinoviev, Bukharin, Rykov and other enemies.
Litvin was included by you in the basic plan for sabotage that German intelligence gave you? Did you also take him into the NKVD upon the assignment of the fascists in order to organize there the espionage-conspiratorial organization?
Yes, that’s how it was.
When you came to work in the NKVD you also brought with you there another of your collaborators, Isaac Shapiro.* When was he recruited by you?
_______________
*For Shapiro see http://www.memo.ru/history/NKVD/kto/biogr/gb537.htm
_______________
I had known Shapiro since 1930. He worked in the cadre section of the Commissariat of Agriculture in which I was a chief. He and I had a good friendship and I valued his zeal and literacy. And when Artnau recruited me and asked me to find people for espionage work I thought right away about Shapiro, who was personally devoted to me and it had always seemed to me that he did not like Soviet power very much and disapproved of the political line of the Party.
Did Shapiro carry out sabotage activity in the Commissariat of Agriculture on your instruction?
Yes, he did. But for a short time only. I decided to take him into the Central Committee, since there I needed people for subversive work.
He knew that you were a German spy?
Yes, I told him that together we would work for German intelligence, so as later to overthrow the government and come to power if there were a war with Germany.
What assignments of yours did Shapiro carry out in the NKVD?
He was de-facto my main assistant. Indeed I first appointed him the chief of the secretariat, and then made him also chief of the first special section. He had a lot of possibilities for sabotage in the NKVD and he carried out all my assignments of an espionage-subversive nature, both mine and Frinovskii's. And when Beria arrived at the NKVD he immediately found out that Shapiro was an enemy and arrested him in November of ’38.
I know that. It would be better for you to tell me how you recruited Liushkov and how you helped him escape to Japan.
I recruited Liushkov right after his return from Leningrad from the investigation of Kirov’s murder. At that time I was already secretary of the Central Committee and Liushkov knew that I was beginning to oversee the NKVD. Therefore, when I called him to my office and hinted that I had information about his ties with the Petliurovists during the civil war in the Ukraine and other incriminating facts, he was frightened and immediately agreed to work for me as a German-Japanese intelligence man.
Did you really have that kind of information?
No, I did not have. I made it all up in order to recruit Liushkov. But I guessed that he was a hostile element with a foul past, and turned out to be correct. Liushkov agreed to become a spy.
How did you order Liushkov to flee to the Japanese?
Ezhov thought for a few seconds. He could not think of a reason why Frinovskii, one of the leaders of the conspiratorial group in the NKVD, had suggested arresting his colleague Liushkov. But then he found a solution.
Frinovskii often told me that he did not like Liushkov. He was cowardly and could betray us all at any moment. Upon our orders he was carrying out important espionage tasks for Japanese intelligence and knew a great deal about our subversive and sabotage work. Frinovskii said that we had to get rid of him, that means, kill him. And he told me that he would take care of that himself. I decided not to hinder him.
Did Frinovskii say how he wanted to kill Liushkov?
No. But I think that he wanted to arrest him first, and then in the inner prison to poison him or put him to death somehow.
What a gang! And who warned Liushkov anyway about the danger?
I don’t know. But Frinovskii wanted to appoint Gorbach from Novosibirsk to Liushkov’s place and recall the latter to Moscow, supposedly for a new job, but in reality to arrest him. Liushkov, most likely, found out that Gorbach was already on route to Khabarovsk, and fled across the border.
_____________________
