The Case of Bukharin - Last Plea, Evening Session March 12
Moscow Trials. The Case of Bukharin
Last Plea - Evening Session March 12
THE COMMANDANT OF THE COURT: The Court is coming, please rise.
THE PRESIDENT: Please be seated. The session is resumed. Accused Bukharin, you may make your
last plea.
Bukharin: Citizen President and Citizens Judges, I fully agree with Citizen the Procurator
regarding the significance of the trial, at which were exposed our dastardly crimes, the
crimes committed by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," one of whose leaders I was, and for all the activities of which I bear responsibility.
This trial, which is the concluding one of a series of trials, has exposed all the crimes and the treasonable activities, it has expaced the historical significance arid the roots of our
struggle against the Party and the Soviet government.
I have been in prison for over a year, and I therefore do riot know what is going on in the
world. But, judging from those fragments of real life that sometimes reached me by
chance, I see, feel and understand that the interests which we so criminally betrayed are
entering a new phase of gigantic development, are now appearing in the international
arena as a great and mighty factor of the international proletarian phase.
We, the accused, are sitting on the other side of the barrier, and this barrier separates us
from you, Citizens Judges. We found ourselves in the accursed ranks of the counter-
revolution, became traitors to the Socialist fatherland.
At the very beginning of the trial, in answer to the question of Citizen the President, whether
I pleaded guilty, I replied by a confession.
In answer to the question of Citizen the President whether I confirmed the testimony I had given, I replied that I confirmed it fully and entirely.
When, at the end of the preliminary investigation, I was summoned for interrogation to the State Prosecutor, who controlled the sum total of the materials of the investigation, he
summarized them as follows (Vol. V, p. 114, December 1, 1937):
Question: Were you a member of the centre of the counter-revolutionary organization of the Rights? I answered: Yes, I admit it.
Second question: Do you admit that the centre of the antiSoviet organization, of which you are
a member, engaged in counter-revolutionary activities and set itself the aim of violently
overthrowing the leadership of the Party and the government? I answered: Yes, I admit it.
Third question: Do you admit that this centre engaged in terrorist activities, organized kulak
uprisings and prepared for Whiteguard kulak uprisings against members of the Political
Bureau, against the leadership of the Party and the Soviet power? I answered: It is true.
Fourth question: Do you admit that you are guilty of treasonable activities; as expressed in
preparations for a conspiracy aiming at a 'coup d'état? I answered: Yes, that Is also true.
In Court I admitted and still admit my guilt in respect to the crimes which I committed and of
which I was accused by Citizen the State Prosecutor at the end of the Court investigation
and on the basis of the materials of the investigation in the possession of the Procurator. I declared also in Court, and I stress and repeat it now, that I regard myself politically
responsible for the sum total -of the crimes committed by the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
I have merited the most severe punishment, and I agree with Citizen the Procurator, who
several times repeated that I stand on the threshold of my hour of death.
Nevertheless, I consider that I have the right to refute certain charges which were brought: a) in the printed Indictment, b) during the Court investigation, and c) in the speech for
the prosecution made by Citizen the Procurator of the U.S.S.R.
I consider it necessary to mention that
during my interrogation
by Citizen the State Prosecutor, the latter declared in a very categorical form that I, as one of the accused, must not admit more than
I had admitted and that I must not Invent facts that have never
happened, andhe demanded that this statement of his should be
Placed on the records.
I once more repeat that I admit that I am guilty of treason to the socialist fatherland, the
most heinous of possible crimes, of the organization of kulak uprisings, of preparations for
terrorist acts and of belonging to an underground, anti-Soviet organization. I furtheradmit
that lam guilty of organizing a conspiracy for a "palace coup." And this, incidentally, proves
the incorrectness of all those passages in the speech for the prosecution made by Citizen the State Prosecutor, where he makes out that I adopted the pose of a pure theoretician, the
pose of a philosopher, and so on. These are pro-roundly practical matters. I said, and I now
repeat, that I was a Deader and not a cog in the counter-revolutionary affairs. It follows from this, as will be clear to everybody, that there were many specific things which I
could not have known, and which I actually did not know, but that this does not relieve me of
responsibility.
I admit that I am responsible both politically and legally for the defeatist orientation, for it did dominate In the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," although I affirm:
a) that personally I did not hold this position;
b) that the phrase about opening the front was not uttered by me, but was an echo of my
conversation with Tomsky;
c) that if Rykov heard this phrase for the first time from me, then, I repeat, It was an echo of my conversation with Tomsky.
But I consider myself responsible for a grave and monstrous crime against the socialist
fatherland and the whole international proletariat. I further consider myself responsible both
politically and legally for wrecking activities, although I personally do not remember having given directions about wrecking activities. I did not talkabout this. I once spoke positively on
this subject to Grinko. Even in my testimony I mentioned that I had once told Radek that I
considered this method of struggle as not very expedient. Yet Citizen the State Prosecutor
makes me out to be a leader of the wrecking activities.
Citizen the Procurator explained in the speech for the prosecution that the members of a gang of brigands might commit robberies in different places, but that they would nevertheless
be responsible for each other. That is true, but in order to be a gang the members of the gang
of brigands must know each other and be in more or less close contact with each other.
Yet I first learnt the name of Sharangovich from the Indictment, and I first saw him here in
Court. It was here that I first learnt about the existence of Maximov, I have never been
acquainted with Pletnev, I have never been acquainted with Kazakov, I have never spoken about counter-revolutionary matters with Rakovsky, I have never spoken on this subject with
Rosengoltz, I have never spoken about it to Zelensky, I have never in my life spoken to
Bulanov, and so on. Incidentally, even the Procurator did not ask me a single question about
these people.
The "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" Is first and foremost a bloc, of Rights and Trotskyites.
How then, generally, could It include Levin, for example, who stated here in court that to
this day he does not know what a Menshevik is? How could it include Pletnev, Kazakov and others?
Consequently, the accused in this dock are not a group. They are confederates in a conspiracy along various lines, but they are not a group in the strict and legal sense of the word. All the
accused were connected in one way or another with the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," some of
them were also connected with intelligence
services, but that is all. This, however, provides no grounds for asserting that this group is
the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites."
Secondly, the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites," which actually did exist and which was smashed
by the organs of the People s Commissariat of Internal Affairs, arose historically. It did
really exist until it was smashed by the organs of the People's Commissariat of Internal
Affairs. It arose historically. I have testified that I first spoke to Kamenev as far back as 1928,
during the Sixth Congress of the Comintern, which I at that time directed.
How then can it be asserted that the bloc was organized on the instructions of fascist
intelligence services? Why, this was in 1928! By the way, at that time I narrowly missed death
at the
hands of an agent of the Polish "Defensiva," a fact very well known to everybody who stood
close to the Party leadership.
Thirdly, I categorically deny that I was connected with foreign intelligence services,. that
they were my masters and that I acted in accordance with their wishes.
Citizen the Procurator asserts that I was one of the major organizers of espionage, on a par
with Rykov. What are the proofs? The testimony of Sharangovich, of whose existence I had
not even heard until I read the indictment.
The record of Sharangovich's testimony was submitted to me, from which it appears that I
practically drew up the plan for wrecking.
Sharangovich: Stop lying, for once in your life at least.
You are lying even now in Court.
THE PRESIDENT: Accused Sharangovich, don't interrupt.
Sharangovich: I could not restrain myself.
Bukharin: Take Ivanov. Generally, what I have to say about his testimony is the following. Certain persons, who were connected with the Okhrana in the past, testified that from
fear of exposure they decided to wage a struggle against the Soviet power, and that they
therefore joined the Rights, the underground organization, which orientated itself on
terrorism.
But where is the logic? Fine logic, indeed. From fear of possible exposure they joined a
terrorist organization, where they ran the risk of being caught the very next day. This is hard
to
imagine; I at least cannot imagine it. But Citizen the Procurator believed them, although all of it sounds very unconvincing.
Khodjayev asserts that I advised him to get in contact with the British resident agent, while
Ikramov says that I told him that Turkestan was a choice morsel for England. In reality, this is
far from the truth. I told Khodjayev that advantage should be taken of the antagonisms
between the imperialist powers, and in a vague form f supported the idea of the independence
of Turkestan. Not a single word was said about any resident agents. Citizen
the State Prosecutor asked: But did you see Khodjayev? I did. Was this in Tashkent? It was in Tashkent. Did you talk to him about politics? About politics. That means that you spoke
about the resident agent. Such conclusions were drawn several times; and when I protested
against them, Citizen the Procurator accused me of not telling the truth, of trying to wriggle
out of it, of wishing to conceal the truth, and so on; and in this he was supported by a number
of my fellow-accused. But it seems to me that in this case real logic is wholly on my side.
Citizen the State Prosecutor declared on the basis of these materials that all the espionage
connections proceeded through the channels of Rykov and Bukharin. Yet Citizen the Procurator
said that every word was important here. The speech of Citizen the Procurator contained
references to two Japanese newspapers. But why does it follow that these reports refer
precisely to me and the Rights?
I, however, admit that I am guilty of the dastardly plan of the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R.,
for Trotsky was negotiating about territorial concessions, and I was in a bloc with the
Trotskyites. This is a fact, and I admit it.
I categorically deny my complicity in the assassination of Kirov, Menzhinsky, Kuibyshev, Gorky and Maxim Peshkov. According ,to Yagoda's testimony, Kirov was assassinated in
accordance with a decision of the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites." I knew nothing about it.
But what Citizen the Procurator calls logic comes here to the aid of the factual content. He
asked whether Bukharin and Rykov could have stood aside from these assassinations; and. he
answered that they could not have stood aside because they knew about them. But not
standing aside and kriowing are one and the same thing. This is what in elementary logic is
called tautology, that is, the acceptance of what is yet to be proved as already proven: But
what is the real explanation? It might be said: Well, then, you villain, how do you explain
these facts? Can you deny that some decision was adopted by some section or other with the
knowledge of Yenukidze and Yagoda, or you deny even that? I cannot deny it, Citizens Judges.
But if I cannot deny it, and at the same time cannot affirm it, I can make a certain
conjecture. After all, you must bear in mind the secrecy of the work. The centre did not hold meetings: matters-were discussed as occasion arose, and given such secret methods of
communication and connections with each other, such things are quite possible.
As to Maxim Peshkov. Yagoda himself says that this assassination concerns him personally: I
have no right to intrude into this sphere. But this is Yagoda's statement, fortified by so,
fundamental a fact as his request to have the matter heard in camera, a- fairly weighty
consideration. Yet Kryuchkov says that it was done in order to lower Maxim Gorky's buoyant life
tonus. And, if.
I am not mistaken, one of the Counsel for Defence also adopted this viewpoint. But this can be
seen through. This argument is countered by so weighty a fact as Yagoda's personal
statement, which is corroborated by the fact that this point was referred to the session Iin
camera.
As to Menzhinsky. Bulanov testified to personal motives here too. Menzhinsky was already ill, he could not have injured the "bloc of Rights and Trotskyites" in any way.
Why, then, can this be retarded as likely?
I will dwell on Bulanov s testimony.
The most painful and most horrible thing is the death of Alexei Maximovich. What testimony did
I give, how did I give it, and under what circumstances? I was asked (apparently the
inves. tigation had already furnished material on the subject) whether I did not recall
anything that could throw light on the hostile attitude of the Right and Trotskyite parts of
the bloc
towards Gorky. I recalled the conversation with Tomsky which I mentioned here in Court and
about which the Procurator interrogated me. The substance of this conversation was that
Tomsky cursorily remarked that the Trotskyites were preparing to commit hostile acts against
the Stalinist, Gorky. It absolutely did not occur to me at the time that he could refer to a
terrorist act. I turned a deaf ear to it. During the interrogation I recalled this conversation
with Tomsky. To the insistent demands of Citizen the Procurator I steadily replied that the
thought of a terrorist act had not occurred to me at the time: Here in Court, in reply to one of the questions of Citizen the Procurator, I said: "But now I see that it was to this he was
referring." Citizen the Procurator drew the following conclusion from this; he said: "What is
this, if not a veiled admission?" A veiled admission of what? What is admitted? The fact that
I had learnt in Court a number of new facts which had not been known to me, and that therefore
the conversation I had had with Tomsky might retrospectively be regarded in an
entirely different perspective. I consider that the argumentation of Citizen the State
Prosecutor is this case cannot be regarded as adequate.
Take the year 1918. Citizen the Procurator declares that in 1924 I was compelled to make a confession regarding such and such a conversation in the Smolny. I was not compelled; I
experienced absolutely no pressure on me to do so; nobody but myself even hinted at it, and I published this example in order at that time, 1923-24, to show the utter harm of the
factional struggle, and what it was leading to. So that firstofall I would like to clear up
this misunderstanding.
Citizen the State Prosecutor said that Bukharin cited nothing in refutation of the evidence of
the five witnesses, who stood here in this Court before us all, before Citizens the judges of
this case,
who asserted that I had the design, the thought, the idea, which I insistently advocated, of
arresting Lenin and physically destroying him, and, moreover, to Lenin were added two other
prominent figures in the Party - Stalin and Sverdlov. But it is not true that I cited no
arguments In refutation. Citizen the Procurator may consider them untrue, feeble, unconvincing,
but
it cannot be said that I cited nothing in refutation. I cited a number of arguments.
The chief witness was Varvara Nikolayevna Yakovleva. Varvara Nikolayevna Yakovleva dates the
whole incident about the
preparations for the conspiracy with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries against Lenin, Stalin
and Sverdlov, for their arrest and supposed murder, etc., - she dates all this in her evidence,
and then at the confrontation and during the trial
to the period prior to the Peace of Brest-Litovsk. I said at the confrontation, at the
preliminary investigation, and in Court, that It is not true. It is not true that before the
Brest-Litovsk
Peace the "Left Communists" and the Trotskyites wanted to effect a coup d'état by forcible
means; it is untrue because the Trotskyites and the so-called "Lefts" had the majority in the
Central Committee, and if the Trotskyites had not capitulated at the decisive moment when the vote on the question of the Brest-Litovsk Peace was taken,
the Trotskites and the "Lefts" would have had the majority in the Central Committee. That being
the case, how can it be supposed that they then capitulated In order to resort to
conspiratorial methods? Everybody who lived through that period remembers
perfectly well that the feelings of the "Left Communists" at that time, before the
Brest-Litovsk Peace, were such that they hoped to win a Party majority at the next Party
Congress. That
being the
case how could there have been any talk about that of Which the Witness Varvara Nikolayevna
Yakovleva now speaks? But I cited another example. Varvara Nikolayevna Yakovleva
asserted that the Moscow Regional Bureau was the factional centre of the "Left Communists."- I
then took the liberty of mentioning several -names, several respected members of the
Party. I only wanted in this way to discredit the argument of Varvara Nikolayevna Yakovleva. It
is well known that a number of prominent people - Kuibyshev, Emelyan Yaroslavsky,
Menzhinsky and others - were
at that time supporters of the "Left Communists," belonged to my "Left" group. The relative
importance of these people was far' greater than that of the Mantsevs, Stukovs and the
rest; and by political temperament and political activity they were More efficient than the
persons mentioned. And so until the Brest-Litovsk Peace the central group in Leningrad
comprised the persons
mentioned. And so I ask, how could there have been a plan of revolt if these people held the
key position in the central group? It
is inconceivable, it is impossible. And here Varvara Nikolayevna
Yakovleva, the principal witness against me, Is mixing things up ,with an entirely different
period, the period following the BrestLitovsk Peace, the Moscow period.
I beg your forgiveness, Citizens, Judges, forfixing your attention
on this point: but as it is a very grave matter ands very interesting
one, and as so much attention was devoted to it in the Court, I took
the liberty of repeating what I have already said. Yet Citizen the
State Prosecutor asserted that I cited nothing to exonerate myself
on this point.
I will not dwell on other things, because I do not want to take up your time. I admit that
there was one conversation with Karelin and Kamkov; and the initiative with regard to the
arrest of Lenin for twenty-four hours and the subsequent bloc with the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries proceeded from the "Left" Socialist-Revoiutioriaries. But in the
first
conversation the reply was negative in a rude form. And as regards the fact that negotiations were subsequently conducted through Pyatakov with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries-
and this may be considered. As Citizen the Procurator, if I am not mistaken, formulated it, an
attempt to overthrow the Soviet power by forcible means-this I admit; it was the case. As
to the plan of physical extermination. I categorically deny it', and here the logic to which
Citizens the State Prosecutor referred, namely, that forcible arrest Implied physical
extermination, will not help in the least. Tire Constituent Assembly was arrested, but nobody
suffered physically. We arrested the faction of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, yet not a
single man of them suffered physically. The "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries arrested
Dzerzhinsky, yet he did not suffer physically. And I say - and this was omitted front the speech
of the
State Prosecutor - that in these criminal and dastardly conversations, it was specifically
stipulated that not one hair of the persons concerned should be injured. You may think what you
like; but it is a real fact.
This episode after the Brest-Litovsk Peace generally-took up an extremely short space of time,
because very soon afterwards the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries began to act. We had to
arrest the faction of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries. I myself took put la this operation, I
myself took part in directing the arrest of the faction of "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries.
After
this we lead nothing more to do with the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries generally. I went
abroad on revolutionary work, then returned,- then; I repeat, I was wounded by a "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionary bomb. I do not deny that it eras not thrown at me personally, as the
witness Mantzev stated, but I want to say that everybody knew that I was to deliver a lecture
in the building of the Moscow Committee, and it was at this moment that the attempt was made
and I was slightly wounded. A number of leading figures in the Party were killed. As is known
this attempt was made by the bloc of the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries, headed by
Cherepanov arid his wife, Tamara, with the so-called underground anarchists.
I mentioned Mantsev because Cherepanov was arrested by the "Left Communist" Mantsev, as he was
not an ally of Cherepanov. It is not true that Bela Kun encouraged the "Left"
Socialist-Revolutionaries.
I want to say that there was one brief period of criminal conspiracy between the "Left
Communists" and the "Left" Socialist-Revolutionaries which quickly collapsed after their
action, In
the suppression of which a number of "Left Communists" took an active part.
To support his speech, the State Prosecutor advanced a number of other points which were to
provide a base for a period, a black period, in my life.
There are a number of mistakes here. First of all, I was never an Otzovist, although the State Prosecutor says I was.
The State Prosecutor accuses me of the fact that I worked with Trotsky as an editor of the
magazine "Novy Mir," and that I had a bloc with Trotsky. I object to this.
The State Prosecutor accuses me of having opposed Comrade Stalin in 1924. I do not remember any
such case. I now conclude my objections to certain charges which the State
Prosecutor brought against me in the course of the trial, and I will return to the crimes I
actually did commit. I have already enumerated there twice. The gravity of these crimes is
immense. I think it is unnecessary to repeat how grave these crimes are; it is clear enough as
it is.
I only want to say that the Trotskyite section on more than one occasion acted separately, and
it is possible that individual members of the bloc, like Yagoda, may also have acted
separately, because Pagoda, as Bulanov testifies, regarded Rykov and myself as his
secretaries, and he himself in this Court has called me a chatterbox who organized idiotic mass
uprisings when it was a question of a coup d'état. But I am connected with the "bloc of Rights
and Trotskyites," and it is quite natural that I politically answer absolutely for everything.
The extreme gravity of the crime is obvious, the political responsibility immense, the legal
responsibility such that it will justify the severest sentence. The severest sentence would be
justified, because a man deserves to be shot ten times over for such crimes. This I admit quite
categorically and without any hesitation at all.
I want briefly to explain the facts regarding my criminal activities and my repentance of my
misdeeds.
I already said when giving my main testimony during the trial, that it was not the naked logic
of the struggle that drove us, the
counter-revolutionary conspirators, into this stinking underground life, which has been exposed
at this trial in ail its starkness. This naked logic of the struggle was accompanied by a
degeneration of ideas, a degeneration of psychology, a degeneration of ourselves, a
degeneration of people. There are well-known historical examples of such degeneration. One need
only mention Briand, Mussolini and others. And we too degenerated, and this brought us into a camp which in its views and features was very much akin to a kulak praetorian fascism.
As this process advanced all the time very rapidly under the conditions of a developing class
struggle, this struggle, its speed, its existence, acted as the accelerator, as the catalytic agent of
the process which was expressed in the acceleration of the process of degeneration.
But this process of degeneration of people, including myself, took place in absolutely
different conditions from those in which the process of degeneration of the international labour
leaders in Western Europe took place. It took place amidst colossal socialist construction,
with its immense scope, tasks, victories, difficulties, heroism....
And on this basis, it seems to me probable that every one of us sitting here in the dock
suffered from a peculiar duality of mind, an incomplete faith in his counter-revolutionary
cause. I
will not say that the consciousness of this was absent, but it was incomplete. Hence a certain
semi-paralysis of the will, a retardation of reflexes. It seems to me that we are to a certain
extent people with retarded reflexes. And this was due not to the absence of consistent
thought, but to the objective grandeur of socialist construction. The contradiction that arose
between the acceleration of our degeneration and these retarded reflexes expressed the position
of a counter-revolutionary, or a developing counter-revolutionary, under the conditions
of developing socialist construction. A dual psychology arose. Each one of us can discern this
in his own soul, although I will not engage in a far-reaching psychological analysis.
Even I was sometimes carried away by the eulogies I wrote of socialist construction, although
on the morrow I repudiated this by practical actions of a criminal character. There arose
what in Hegel's philosophy is called a most unhappy mind. This unhappy mild differed from the ordinary unhappy mind only by the fact that it was also a criminal mind.
The might of the proletarian state found its expression not only in the fact that it smashed
the counter-revolutionary bands, but also in the fact that it disintegrated its enemies from
within, that it disorganized the will of its enemies. Nowhere else is this the case, nor can it be in any capitalist country.
It seems to me that when some of the West European and American intellectuals be;in to
entertain doubts and vacillations in
connection with the trials taking place in the U.S.S.R., this is primarily due to the fact that
these people do not understand the radical distinction, namely, that in our country the
antagonist,
the enemy, has at the same time a divided, a dual mind. And I think that this is the first
thing to be understood.
I take the liberty of dwelling on these questions because I had considerable contacts with these upper intellectuals abroad, especially among scientists, and I must explain to them what
every Young Pioneer in the Soviet Union knows.
Repentance is often attributed to diverse and absolutely absurd things like Thibetan powders
and the like. I must say of myself that in prison, where I was confined for over a year. I
worked, studied, and retained my clarity of mind. This will serve to refute by facts alt fables
and absurd counter-revolutionary tales.
Hypnotism is suggested. But I conducted my own defence in Court from the legal standpoint too,
orientated myself on the spot, argued with the State Prosecutor; and anybody, even a
man who has little experience in this branch of medicine, must admit that hypnotism of this
kind is altogether impossible.
This repentance is often attributed to the Dostoyevsky mind, to the specific properties of the
soul ("l'âme slave" as it is called), and this can be said of types like Alyosha Karamazov, the
heroes of the "Idiot "and other Dostoyevsky characters, who are prepared to stand up in the
public square and cry: "Beat me, Orthodox Christians, I am a villain!"
But that is not the case here at all. "L'âme slave" and the psychology of Dostoyevsky
characters are a thing of the remote past in our country, the pluperfect tense. Such types do not
exist
our country, or exist perhaps only on the outskirts of small provincial towns, if they do even
there. On the contrary, such a psychology is to be found in Western Europe.
I shall now speak of myself, of the reasons for my repentance. Of course, it must be admitted that incriminating evidence plays a very important part: For three months I refused to say
anything Then I began to testify. Why? Because while In prison I made x revaluation of my
entire past. For when you ask yourself: "lf you must die, what are you dying for?"-an
absolutely black vacuity suddenly rises before you with startling vividness.. There was nothing
to die for, if one wanted to die unrepented. nd, on the contrary, everything positive that
glistens in the Soviet Union acquires new dimensions in a man's mind. This in the end disarmed
me completely and led me to bend my knees before the Party and the country. And when
you ask yourself: "Very well, suppose you do not die; suppose by some miracle you remain alive,
again what for? Isolated from everybody, an enemy of the people, in an inhuman
position, completely isolated from everything that
constitutes the essence of life..." And at once the sane reply arises. And at such moments,
Citizens judges, everything personal, till the personal incrustation, all the rancour, pride, and a
number of other things, fall away, disappear. And, in addition, when the reverberations of the
broad international struggle reach your ear, all this in its entirety does its work, and the
result is the complete internal moral victory of the U.S.S.R. over its kneeling opponents. I
happened by chance to get Feuchtwanger's book from the prison library. There he refers to the
trials of the Trotskyites. It produced a profound Impression on me; but I must say that
Feuchtwanger did not get at the core of the matter. He stopped half way, not everything was
clear to him; when, as a matter of fact, everything is clear. World history is a world court of
judgement: A number of groups of Trotskyite leaders went bankrupt and have been cast
into the pit. That is true. But you cannot do what Feuchtwanger does in relation to Trotsky in
particular, when he places him on the same plane as Stalin. Here his arguments are
absolutely false. For in reality the whole country stands behind Stalin; he is the hope of the
world; he is a creator. Napoleon once said that fate is politics. The fate of Trotsky is
counter-revolutionary politics.
I am about to finish. I am perhaps speaking for the last time in my life.
I am explaining how I came to realize the necessity of capitulating to the investigating
authorities and to you, Citizens judges. We came out against the joy of the new life with the most
criminal methods of struggle. I refute the accusation of having plotted against the life of
Vladimir Ilyich, but my counter-revolutionary confederates, and I at their head, endeavoured
to
murder Lenin's cause, which is being carried on with such tremendous success by Stalin. The
logic of this struggle led ùs step by step into the blackest, quagmire. And it has once more
been proved that departure from the position of Bolshevism means siding with political
counter-revolutiocnary banditry. Counter-revolutionary banditry has now been smashed, we
have beer, smashed, and we repent our frightful crimes.
The point, of course, is not this repentance, or my personal repentance in particular. The Courtcan pass its verdict without it. -The confession of the accused is not essential. The
confession of the accused is a medieval principle of jurisprudence. But here we also have the internal demolition of the forces of .counter-revolution. And one must be a Trotsky not to
lay down-one's arms.
I feel it my duty to say here that in the parallelogram of forces which went to make up the counter-revolutionary tactics, Trotsky was the principal motive force. And the most acute methods - terrorism, espionage, the dismemberment of the U.S.S.R. and wrecking-proceeded
primarily from this source.
I may infer a priori that Trotsky and my other allies in crime,
as well as the Second International, all the more since I discussed this with Nikolayevsky,
will endeavour to defend us, especially and particularly myself. I reject this defence, because
I am kneeling before the country, before the Party, before the whole people. The monstrousness of
my crimes is immeasurable especially in the new stage of the struggle of the U.S.S.R.
May this trial be the last severe lesson, and may the great might of the
U.S.S.R. become clear to all. Let it be clear to all that the counterrevolutionary thesis of
the national limitedness of the U.S.S.R. has remained suspended in the air like a wretched rag.
Everybody perceives the wise leadership of the country that is ensured by Stalin.
It is in the consciousness of this that I await the verdict. What matters is not the personal feelings of a repentant enemy, but the flourishing progress of the U.S.S.R. and its international importance.
[Signed]
V. ULRICH
Army Military Jurist
President of the Military Collegium of
the Supreme Court of the U.S.S.R.
SECRETARY : A. BATNER
Military Jurist First Rank
Contents |
Morning Session March 7
Bukharin Archive
